---
treatise: "A Treatise on The Art of Thought: The First Treatise"
chapter: "4"
title: "Treatise 1, Chapter 4: The Center of the Universe"
---

<sup>4.1</sup> By asking you to request a miracle, I am honoring who you
are and inviting you into the state of mind that is miracle-readiness.
The art of thought is the expression of that state. The art of thought
is the miracle. 

<sup>4.2</sup> Thus we must dispel, along with the illusion of fear, the
illusion of specificity. You have not been asked to request a specific
miracle. Although your thoughts have naturally gone to
consideration of the specific, this is but an indication that you are
still in the habit of thinking you learned under the instruction of the
ego-mind. This Treatise must change that habit in order for all your
thoughts to become the miracles that express the truth of who you are.
This Treatise will put your instruction fully under my guidance and
allow you to disregard the instruction of the ego-mind. 

<sup>4.3</sup> *A Course of Love* began with an injunction to pray. *A
Course in Miracles* began with a definition of miracles. Both are the
same. Prayer and the art of thought are the same.  This should serve to
make it clear that the request I have made of you is once again far more
broad and generalizable than your old habit of thought has led you to
see.  Miracles are, in other words, a way of thinking, the new way that
we are going to learn together. They are the state of giving and
receiving as one. They are the state in which blessings flow. They are
your natural state. 

<sup>4.4</sup> How can the rules of thought we have identified serve to
bring about the miracle that you are? The first means identified was
that of experiencing what is and acknowledging what is both as a fact of
your existence as a human being and as a gift of the Creator. Now that
we have more properly identified the miracle, you must see that your
Self is what is in need of identification and acknowledgment. This
identification and acknowledgment was the stated goal of *A Course of
Love*. It does not negate your existence as a human being nor does it
deny your existence as being a gift of the Creator. Recall the sunset.
<sup>A</sup>re you any less the glory of God than the sun? This is a
call to be as aware of your Self as you are capable of being aware of
the sunset. 

<sup>4.5</sup> When the sun has remained but an object to you, no effect
is possible from the sunset.  The sun, even during the most blazing
sunset, has at times remained no more than object to you. So too has
your Self.  When your Self is seen as no more than a body it is seen as
little more than an object. 

<sup>4.6</sup> The second rule of the art of thought is to acknowledge
relationship, the call for a response, and the nature of all gifts as
being given to all.  This is thus a call to realize that you exist in
relationship, that your relationship calls for a response, and that you
are given to all as all are given to you. 

<sup>4.7</sup> This is an enormous shift in your habit of thought as you
become the center of the universe. 

<sup>4.8</sup> This is quite a different *you* than the self of the
ego-mind. The ego-mind, in its imitation of creation, put the “you” of
the ego or the body at the center of its thought system and from this
central position developed all of its ideas of glorifying the separated
self as well as of subjugating the separated self. This subjugation to
the ego-mind is what led to the ego-mind being able to develop the “laws
of man.” These laws of man are the laws of the body’s survival. 

<sup>4.9</sup> Your responsibilities shift completely under the laws of
God. Your thoughts are released from their concentration on what exists
outside of you as your responsibility is placed where it belongs, in the
call to respond. This response is only yours to give and is all you are
asked to give. This response comes from within the Self—the rightly
identified and acknowledged Self. 

<sup>4.10</sup> Think of all you now feel responsible for and this
lesson will become more clear. While your first thoughts will
automatically go to a lengthy list of those concerns associated with the
survival of the body, they will miss a whole aspect of concerns
associated with keeping others other. You keep others other by
attempting to respond for them rather than responding to them. You thus
have thought it is your responsibility to care for the world outside of
yourself rather than for your Self. 

<sup>4.11</sup> There is much play on the words response, responsible,
and responsibility here. This is no accident. Your call is to respond
and you have seen this call incorrectly as a call to be responsible. The
idea of responsibility sprang from the ego-mind that would usurp the
power of God. What kind of gift arrives with a demand for the receiver
to be responsible for it?

<sup>4.12</sup> You may answer that there are many, even within this
Course’s definition of gift, the most obvious of which might be your
children. Another of which might be your talents. It is the
idea of your responsibility for these gifts that has led to your
oppression. Again I tell you, your call is to respond rather than to be
responsible. How can you be free to respond when your thinking remains
tied to responsibility? 

<sup>4.13</sup> Responsibility but implies a guardianship that is not
needed.  Responsibility implies needs that would not be met without you.
Response is given and thus genuine. It is a natural act of giving and
receiving as one. Responsibility is a demanded response, a necessary
response, an obligation. Response happens from within. Responsibility is
all about dealing with an outside world. While both may result in the
same or similar actions, this does not negate the need for the
difference to be realized. Charity is a responsibility. Love is a
response. See you not the difference? Can a father not be guided by
responsibility and still fail to give love? Can a dancer not struggle
mightily to perfect her talent without experiencing its joy? 

<sup>4.14</sup> Do you think the Creator is responsible for what was
created? To think of the Creator in this way is to think of the Creator
with the upside-down thinking of the ego-mind. Is this not the kind of
thinking that has caused you to blame God for what you have labeled
“bad” as well as to praise God for what you have labeled “good”? Would
not this kind of a creator be at odds with the concept of free will? 

<sup>4.15</sup> But for a creator not to respond to what has been
created—this would indeed be a travesty!  This would be antithetical to
the laws of creation! This would be antithetical to love!  

<sup>4.16</sup> My request to you to choose a miracle is but a request
to you to hear Creation’s response to who you are. What might such a
response sound like? Feel like? Look like? It is a response of pure
appreciation and love. It is always available. It is the gift given in
everything you look upon and see without the obstacle of the ego-mind’s
interpretation. 

<sup>4.17</sup> Let us speak a moment of this interpretation. That each
of you interprets what you see, read, hear, smell, and touch differently
must mean something. What you have decided that this means is that you
are an independent thinker, something you have prized. Some of you will
accept another’s interpretation of meaning if it is helpful to you,
saves you time, or seems in accord with your own views. Others of you
feel it necessary to interpret everything *on your own*. Without further
discussion, you would see interpretation and response quite similarly
and this would but lead to a continuation of the belief in different
forms of the truth. 

<sup>4.18</sup> The art of thought is being taught here in order to
prevent just such a conclusion. The truth is the truth and not dependent
upon your definition of it. A response is not an interpretation. A
response is an expression of who you are rather than of what you believe
something else to be. 

<sup>4.19</sup> You who have thought that your interpretation of events
and feelings has given them their meaning—think again. Their meaning
exists already and is not up to you to determine. This is not your
responsibility. You who have thought that your interpretation of
situations and the feelings they have aroused have defined who you are,
think again. Be willing to apply the art of thought rather than the
thinking of the ego-mind. Interpretation but gives you opinions *about*
those things that you experience. Response reveals the truth to you
because it reveals the truth *of you*.

<sup>4.20</sup> The joy you have thought has come to you from an
interpretation that is uniquely your own is as nothing compared to the
joy that will come to you from a response that is uniquely *you*. But
you must give up your penchant for interpretation before you can learn
to respond. I realize that this will concern you while you continue to
not realize the difference between response and interpretation. The only
way for this concern to have the chance to leave you is for you to begin
to practice the art of thought and thus begin to learn the difference. 

<sup>4.21</sup> As was already stated, the first opportunities for you
to learn the art of thought will be provided through what we have called
the re-experiencing of memory. These are opportunities to re-experience
the lessons your life has brought you. You will experience the same
lessons in the same way, rather than in a *new* way, if you meet these
experiences again with the attitude of interpreting them rather than
responding to them. They do not require interpretation but response.
Response was what was required in the first place and your inability to
respond need not be repeated. You are being revisited with these lessons
expressly for the purpose of *not* repeating your former reaction or
interpretation of them.  You are being revisited with these lessons so
that you may apply to them the art of thought rather than the thinking
of the ego-mind. The art of thought will reveal the truth to you. The
thinking of the ego-mind would simply reinterpret the meaning you
previously gave to these lessons.

<sup>4.22</sup> This is a sticky distinction, for you are used to
congratulating yourself on the maturity required to reinterpret previous
lessons. To form a new opinion about something gives you a feeling of
open-mindedness and growth. Lay aside your desire for reasons for
self-congratulation in favor of Self-revelation. The saying, “The truth
shall be revealed to you” is the same as saying “Your Self shall be
revealed to you.” 

<sup>4.23</sup> *Revelation* is a proper description of the mode by
which the art of thought teaches and helps you learn. It is not through
study, effort, or reinterpretation but through revelation.

<sup>4.24</sup> Revelation is direct communication with God in the sense
that it is direct communication from a Self you have known not, the Self
that is one with the Creator. 

<sup>4.25</sup> We must backtrack a little here to do the same
exposition that we did in regard to miracles in regard to revelation. By
asking you to choose a miracle, you were provided a means through which
your fears became clear to you. There are a few of you who would deny
these fears.  Fewer still are unafraid of miracles and eager to embrace
them. As you may have surmised, we are getting at your final fears here,
those most deeply buried and kept in secret from you. Some of you who
would count yourselves least fearful are those of you whose fears are
most deeply buried. So whether you count yourself among the fearful or
not, please continue to give me your attention just a while longer as we
uncover all that would still hold you back. 

<sup>4.26</sup> As was said within *A Course of Love*, all fear is doubt
about your Self. Now we must expand upon this thought, for doubt about
your Self is doubt about God. While God is nothing but the Source of
Love, you have, in your doubt, made of God the source of fear. Pause a
moment here and let the enormity of this confusion sink in, for this is
the reversal in thinking that will pave the way for all the rest.
Because of this confusion you have responded to Creation with fear. Is
it any wonder a new response is asked of you?

<sup>4.27</sup> In the translations of the Bible and many other
religious texts, the word or idea of awe has been confused with the word
or idea of fear.  *A Course in Miracles* told you that awe is the
providence of God and not due miracles or any other thing or being. I
bring up this point to assure you that this confusion is nothing new,
but a confusion so deeply ingrained in you that it has become an aspect
of yourself as human being. From time immemorial, fear has been
associated with God. This was the thinking I came to reverse. While I
succeeded in revealing a God of love, this revelation has not been
reconciled with your experience here.  This is what we will now seek to
do by putting an end to fear and ushering in, with this ending, the
beginning of a time of miracles.

