---
treatise: "A Treatise on The Art of Thought: The First Treatise"
chapter: "2"
title: "Treatise 1, Chapter 2: The Art of Thought"
---

<sup>2.1</sup> The closing pages of *A Course of Love* instructed you to
think no more. A break in time was needed for you to disengage the
ego-mind that produced the type of thinking that needs to come to an
end. This ending is but a beginning in truth and has led you to
readiness to learn the art of thought. 

<sup>2.2</sup> We identified much for you to leave behind within the
pages of *A Course of Love*. These many things which seemed so distinct
and separate and which ranged from fear, to struggle, to effort, to
control and protection, can all now be seen as the product of the
thoughts of your ego-mind. 

<sup>2.3</sup> To experience the truth and apply to that experience the
thoughts of the ego-mind, the same thoughts that were applied to former
experiences of the truth, would be to respond to love the same way
again. The questions you have asked concerning how love could be the
answer when it has been preached by so many for so long are answered
here. The answer lies in your response to love. To respond is to answer.
You have sought your “answer” everywhere, but here is where it lies. It
is yours to give and can only be given to love from love.  Only in
giving is it received. 

<sup>2.4</sup> Thus we have sought to uncover your Source, to provide
you access to your heart, from which all responses flow. As your heart
is the Source of your true Self, your thoughts, once removed from those
of the ego-mind are the expression and extension of your true Self. They
are the answer of the Created to the Creator, the answer of the Self to
God. 

<sup>2.5</sup> Thoughts that were guarded by the ego-mind were in need
of being set free. Appealing to your heart was the means or cause of
this freedom being accomplished in you. What was spoken of within *A
Course of Love* as unlearning has begun and continues here. What was
spoken of within *A Course of Love* as new learning has begun and
continues here as well. The difference is that you are now ready to
learn a new means of response to this unlearning and learning. That
response is the art of thought. 

<sup>2.6</sup> The so-called thinking of the ego-mind was so tyrannical
that its use throughout your lifetime deadened many of your feelings. It
led you so far from the truth that you no longer trust in it. It
confused the smallest issues to such a degree that it left you unable to
respond purely to anything. The so-called thinking of the ego-mind could
be likened to chitchat, background noise, static. So little meaning did
it have that all meaning became muddled. 

<sup>2.7</sup> Your only recourse to this situation in the past was
focus. You thus applied your thoughts to learning subjects of a specific
nature. Through this focus you believed you accomplished much. You
congratulated yourself on having the discipline required to train your
mind to focus and to learn, or shamed yourself when you were unable to
do so. To those most skilled in this training of the ego-mind worldly
rewards have long been given. These people attain degrees and skills and
then further apply the discipline that they have learned by using their
skills and knowledge in the world for even greater rewards. These
rewards have further emphasized the importance of such focused thoughts
and thus further entrenched the ego-mind. To think that you could learn
the truth of who you are through these same means was the fallacy that
the early teaching of *A Course of Love* sought to dispel. 

<sup>2.8</sup> But again, as was stated often throughout *A Course of
Love*, an alternative exists.  It did not exist when you knew not of it
and so your attempts at learning have been valiant and are no cause for
anxiety. But now this alternative is being revealed to you, and it does
call for a change of thought so extensive that all thought as you once
knew it does need to cease. 

<sup>2.9</sup> You have already succeeded in learning in this new way
once or you would not be here. This is your proof that you can do so
again and again until the new way totally replaces the old and the art
of thought leaves behind forever the need for what the ego-mind once but
seemed to offer you. 

<sup>2.10</sup> The thoughts of your ego-mind were ruled by the nature
of the body.  To exist as *creatures* whose only thoughts are of
survival of the body is to exist in a lower order. The laws of the body
have thus subjected you to conditions that invited the ego-mind to turn
its attention to existence in this lower order. It is only *you* who can
recognize and invite the higher order or subject *yourself* to its
conditions. It is only your attention to the existence of this higher
order that will reveal its laws to you. These are the laws of God or the
laws of love. 

<sup>2.11</sup> The laws of God or the laws of love can be summarized by
the simple statement of giving and receiving being one in truth. The
implications of this statement are far broader than at first might seem
indicated. All of these implications have been touched upon
within *A Course of Love*. The most essential of these implications is
that of relationship for giving and receiving cannot occur without
relationship.

<sup>2.12</sup> All relationship is but relationship between Creator and
Created.  The new means of thinking is referred to here as the “art” of
thought in order to call your wholehearted attention to the continual
act of creation that is the relationship between Creator and Created.
Creation is but a dialogue to which you have not responded. The art of
thought will free you to respond. 

<sup>2.13</sup> This response needs to at first be seen in two parts. An
example illustrates. To look at a sunset is to see an object, the sun.
It is also to see the sky, to see the variety of colors displayed, to
see the horizon. It is to see the surrounding area, perhaps to see the
play of clouds among the descending rays, perhaps to feel the warmth or
chill of an evening. The whole experience might include the sound of
birds or traffic, the rhythm of the ocean, or the pounding of your own
heart. It might be a shared experience, one in which you share the
feeling of awe inspired by this sight with one you love. It might be
seen as you walk or drive, rake leaves or gaze from an office window. It
might be a deathbed vision or the first sunset of which a young child is
aware. It might be a scene taken totally for granted as you go about
whatever business calls you at that hour.

<sup>2.14</sup> The sunset is a gift of God. It is what it is. This is
the first part of this example.  

<sup>2.15</sup> The second part is its reception. A gift has been given.
What is your response? 

<sup>2.16</sup> The sunset is part of your human experience. In the
lower order of that experience it speaks to your survival needs. It may
signal many things ranging from a desire to get safely home before it is
dark, to a desire to eat an evening meal. It signals change in the
natural world around you. Birds and squirrels and flowers too have a
reaction to the setting of the sun. They react to what is. This is their
response, an altogether lovely response of created to Creator. 

<sup>2.17</sup> Yet to rise above this lower order of experience is to
receive and to give back. First the sunset is experienced for what it
is. It is acknowledged. It is a fact of your existence as a human being,
a part of the natural world, a gift of the Creator. Secondly, it is
experienced relationally. It speaks to you and you to it. It binds you
to the natural world and to the present but also to the higher world and
the eternal. It binds you to all those who have and will experience the
sunset by being a shared experience. It is there not for you alone, but
in listening to its call for a response, it becomes a gift for you that
is in no way diminished by it being a gift for all. 

<sup>2.18</sup> Finally, the sunset becomes, through your experience of
it, an opportunity to apply the art of thought. 

<sup>2.19</sup> Thus, these are the basic rules of the art of thought:
First, to experience what is and to acknowledge what is, both as a fact
of your existence as a human being and as a gift of the Creator. Second,
to acknowledge the relationship inherent in the experience, the call for
a response, and the nature of all gifts as being given to all. 

<sup>2.20</sup> While this may seem somewhat elementary in relation to a
sunset, its application to all areas of life will at first seem quite
demanding.  But what is elementary remains elementary once it is
learned. 

<sup>2.21</sup> To experience what is and to acknowledge what is, one
must be present, present as human being. To experience what is and to
acknowledge what is as being a gift of God is to be present as a divine
being having a human experience. No part of being is negated. All senses
and feelings of the human being are called into awareness and yet there
is also acknowledgment of the Creator behind the Created. 

<sup>2.22</sup> To acknowledge the relationship and the nature of the
gift is to realize unity. To realize the call for a response is to hear
the call to create like unto the Creator. This creating like unto the
Creator may be used as a definition for the art of thought.

