---
treatise: "A Treatise on The Art of Thought: The First Treatise"
chapter: "3"
title: "Treatise 1, Chapter 3: The Call to the Miracle"
---

<sup>3.1</sup> The first opportunities for the art of thought to be
applied relate to memory in terms of your experience here. In other
words they will relate to the re-experiencing of all that you believe
has shaped your life. These opportunities are but the forerunners of new
learning. They are but opportunities to replace illusion with the truth
so that the truth of who you are is all that remains. 

<sup>3.2</sup> Seeing how different from the experience of illusion is
the experience of truth is the same as seeing how different the art of
thought is from the thinking of the ego-mind! The art of thought is
diametrically opposed to the thinking of the ego-mind. 

<sup>3.3</sup> The ego-mind sees nothing for what it is. The ego-mind
sees not anything but what it *wants* as gifts and even these it sees
not as gifts but as rewards. The ego-mind barters rather than giving and
receiving as one, believing in a return only for effort. Because it sees
only rewards and not gifts, it cannot see that gifts are shared. Because
it cannot see that gifts are shared, it cannot afford to see
relationship. Because it believes it is *on its own* it cannot see the
higher order. Because of all of this, it cannot experience the truth and
so exists in illusion. 

<sup>3.4</sup> The experience of truth dispels illusion and thus the
ego-mind. The art of thought replaces the ego-mind with the
wholehearted. The wholehearted is but the heart and mind joined in
unity. 

<sup>3.5</sup> How can what is closely guarded extend? How can what is
controlled create? How can what continues to give in to fear know love?
All your reasons for fear-based living have been discounted one by one.
And yet you dare not try to live without it. Why? Because of the
thoughts of the ego-mind. The ego-mind is concerned only with its own
survival but it has you convinced it is your survival that depends on
it. How can you be convinced to live as if the truth were otherwise? For
only if you begin to live as if the truth were otherwise can you see
that it truly is otherwise, or based on a wisdom other than what has
come before. 

<sup>3.6</sup> The only way for you to come to live in truth is through
faith; not a faith in what might be, but a faith in what is. A faith in
what is, is a faith in miracles. Miracles are what you are now asked to
call upon.  For calling upon miracles is an act of faith. You think the
quest for miracles is a quest for proof that demonstrates a lack of
faith but the reverse is true. What kind of miracle would lead to a lack
of faith?  There is no such kind of miracle. 

<sup>3.7</sup> I ask you now to request a miracle. 

<sup>3.8</sup> What kind of a miracle should you ask for? How big of a
miracle should you request? How big is your faith? How much proof does
it require? I speak not in jest but ask you to seriously consider just
what kind of miracle is needed to get you to change your mind about who
you are and thus about the nature of your thoughts. 

<sup>3.9</sup> Observe yourself as you think through this question. Can
you remove all fear from it? Why should it be that fear is what you
encounter? The bigger the miracle that occurs to you, the more you are
likely to fear the consequences. These are not consequences for the
world you fear, but consequences for yourself. If you requested a
miracle, and it came true, what then? If you request a small miracle and
it comes true, how awful you would feel that you had not requested a
bigger miracle. You will almost feel panic at the thought of such a
choice being put before you. If you will agree to choose a
miracle at all, which many of you will balk at doing, you want to choose
the “right” miracle. Some of you may think through just what kind of
miracle would be most convincing to you since you see this exercise as
what it is, an attempt to convince you to think otherwise about
yourself. If you ask for a cure for a disease, how will you know that
this cure is a miracle and not the result of scientific discovery or the
natural course an illness was bound to take?  What miracle could be seen
as only miracle and not leave doubt as to its circumstances? Would you
choose a miracle that would leave no room for doubt? Such a simple
miracle might be the turning of water into wine.  What harm could come
from it? And yet even this you would fear for if you asked for such a
miracle and it came to be, you would then have to contemplate your power
to perform miracles. Here you find your greatest fear of all: fear of
your power. 

<sup>3.10</sup> As was said within *A Course of Love*, willingness does
not require conviction but leads to conviction.  The apostles had no
faith in their ability to perform miracles. The faith they showed was in
their willingness to try. This little willingness gave way to conviction
as miracles flowed through them as the blessings that they are. 

<sup>3.11</sup> I do not want to lose any of you here, but such is your
fear that you can already see your own loss. As great as the fear of
miracles is, the fear of not being able to perform is greater. You think
of this as a test and one you can pass or fail. And what’s more, not
only would your passing of this test require you to contemplate your
power, but your failure would require you to contemplate your lack of
it. If you asked for a miracle and it did not come to be, wouldn’t it
negate all you have achieved thus far and send you back to a state of
disbelief? Better not to try at all than to risk trying and failing when
such consequences would seem to hang in the balance. 

<sup>3.12</sup> But again I tell you this is no idle request. Whatever
is necessary to convince you now is what I will provide. Such is the
urgency of the time, the urgency for the return to unity, the urgency of
the need to leave fear behind. Can you not, from this one example of
your fear of miracles, see the glaring reality of all you still would
fear? 

<sup>3.13</sup> This too is a means of unlearning. How can you leave
behind all you fear without seeing all you fear for what it is and
choosing to lay it aside? 

<sup>3.14</sup> This does not have to be done right now if your fear is
mightier than your willingness. But hold this thought within your mind.
What is needed to convince you will be provided. Such is the urgency of
your return to unity. If not now, then soon, you will be asked to make
this final choice, this choice to leave fear behind for good and to
become who you are. 

<sup>3.15</sup> Who you are is a miracle worker.  This is not all that
you are but is a measure of who you are. This is not all that you are
but this is the quickest means of realizing who you are. As was said in
*A Course in Miracles*, miracles are timesaving devices. Although asking
you to choose a miracle would seem to violate one of the rules of
miracle-readiness as described in *A Course in Miracles*, the extreme
need of your return to love requires extreme measures. 

<sup>3.16</sup> Let us consider your objections to miracles one by one
for in so doing we will uncover the source of all your fears as well as
the Source of miracles. 

<sup>3.17</sup> First, you will say you have no objections to miracles,
only to having them performed through you. Your lack of willingness to
perform miracles, you will say, stems from your unworthiness to perform
miracles. Your unworthiness stems from your belief that you are “only”
human. You are not God. You are not a holy person. Thus miracles should
not flow through you. 

<sup>3.18</sup> Second, you would object to being asked to choose a
miracle. Surely you cannot know the consequences of what any miracle
would have on the rest of the world. If you were to ask for a life to be
spared, how would you know it was not that person’s “time to die”? If
you were to ask for the cure of a disease, how would you know that
disease was not meant to be to further someone’s learning? If you were
to ask to win the lottery, how could such selfishness not be punished? 

<sup>3.19</sup> Third, you might, at the suggestion that you need proof
to shore up your faith, balk, even while you remain convinced that a
failure of such proof would shake your faith. 

<sup>3.20</sup> Fourth, you might balk at the suggestion that God would
grant miracles on such a whim, such a fanciful idea as that of your
being convinced of your own power. How could this possibly be important?
Even were you to possess such power, surely it is a power that is of God
and needs not you for its accomplishment. Better not to mess with such
things. Even the thought of it leads you to ideas of magic and power
that are not of this world and thus that must have a dark side as well
as a light. Here suspicion dawns and threatens all you have come to hold
dear. 

<sup>3.21</sup> These thoughts border on the sacrilegious. Miracles are
the realm of Jesus and of the saints and that is surely where they
belong.  To even implore them would be heresy. 

<sup>3.22</sup> You fear as well that you do not know what miracles are
and thus cannot perform them. You want a definition first. What is an
appropriate miracle? For whom should they be requested? What are the
criteria? How are they done? Do they happen all at once? Or can they be
for some future date? What about the correction of something that has
already occurred? You have far too many questions without answers to
choose a miracle. 

<sup>3.23</sup> Although many more fears might prevail upon you, we will
consider only one further fear, the fear of making the wrong choice in
your choice of miracles. This is the same as a fear of scarcity. For
surely the working of one miracle would be a fluke anyway. Proof of
nothing and easily discounted and explained away. Surely to believe that
where one miracle worked another might be possible would be to have
ideas of grandeur not meant for you.  Here your thoughts might stray to
the performing of many miracles. What a media circus that would be. You
would be in demand to end so much suffering in so many places. Surely
you wouldn’t want that even if it could come to be. Indeed this would
require the auspices of a saintly soul and not one such as you. 

<sup>3.24</sup> See you not the choices made in each of these scenarios
and the reasoning or lack of reasoning behind them?  You are not worthy.
You are not saintly, godlike or even holy. You might choose incorrectly.
You might invoke retribution. You might be selfish.  You might be proved
to have no faith. You might succumb to thoughts of grandeur. 

<sup>3.25</sup> In short, you are too afraid, for a variety of reasons,
to try. In short, you are not willing and have many reasons for not
being willing.  What we have done here is bring your fears to light,
fears that you did not even realize you held so closely or would be so
terrified to let go. 

<sup>3.26</sup> Now we can address each of these fears, bringing to them
the art of thought rather than the thinking of the ego-mind.

