---
treatise: "A Treatise on The Nature of Unity and Its Recognition: The Second Treatise"
chapter: "13"
title: "Treatise 2, Chapter 13: The Final Call"
---

<sup>13.1</sup> The final call of this Treatise is, in contrast to those
put forth previously, a personal call from me to you. By now you have
seen that your fears of losing yourself to God were unfounded. By now
you have seen that your self does not need to stand separate and alone
in order to be fulfilled under the mantle of individuality. You have
been told to put on a new mantle, a new identity. What does this mean? 

<sup>13.2</sup> Now that you have been made ready, I am ready to return
you to your Self. Now that you have been made ready, it is time for us
to have a personal relationship. We have, within these lessons, taken
you far from your personal self, and I, as your teacher, have all but
discounted the personal self I experience in relationship with you. Now,
in unity, we are ready to be personal again. 

<sup>13.3</sup> While the personal self is the subject of the next
Treatise, this is my invitation to you, specifically, to enter into a
holy and personal relationship with me, specifically. While you are
here, you have a persona. While this persona is no longer an ego-self
but a Christ-Self, it is still a persona. This is the “you” who laughs
and loves and cries and shares with friends in a world now different
than the one you once perceived. I know of this world and I am here to
guide you through it. I, too, am friend to you.

<sup>13.4</sup> I am the corrector of false thinking because I lived
among you as a thinking being. Think not that I was different than you
and you will realize that we are truly one in being with our Father. As
you move into the world with the end of the time of separation and the
beginning of the time of unity taking place around you, practice the
beliefs that have been put forth in this Treatise. Know that, in the
time of unity, the truth will be shared by all. 

<sup>13.5</sup> Call upon your relationship with me to aid you, as I
call upon you to assist me in calling all of our brothers and sisters to
their return to unity. We call to one another in gratitude. This is the
attitude of the wholehearted, the place from which all calls are sounded
and received, the place where the true thinking of those united in mind
and heart arises. Gratitude is the recognition of the state of grace in
which you exist here and remain forever beyond all time and the passing
of all form. It is an attitude of praise and thankfulness that flows
between us now. The light of heaven shines not down upon you but is
given and received in equal exchange by all who in creation exist
together in oneness eternal.

<sup>13.6</sup> Forget not who you truly are, but forget not also to be
in joy in your experience here. Remember that the seriousness with which
you once looked at life is of the ego. Drape your persona in a mantle of
peace and joy. Let who you are shine through the personal self who
continues to walk this world a while longer. Listen for my voice as I
guide you to your purpose here and linger with you in this time to end
all time. We are here, together, in love, to share love. This is not
such a frightening task. Let fear go and walk with me now. Our journey
together is just beginning as we return to the premise put forth in “A
Treatise on the Art of Thought:” that of the elevation of form.

Perron, Mari. A Course of Love: Combined Volume (Second Edition) . Take Heart Publications. Kindle Edition. 
