---
treatise: "A Treatise on The Nature of Unity and Its Recognition: The Second Treatise"
chapter: "9"
title: "Treatise 2, Chapter 9: The Belief: There Is No Loss But Only Gain"
---

<sup>9.1</sup> I ask you now to remember a time when you felt from
another the desire to help or to meet your needs. Do not think that this
desire is not present in all relationships. It is only the ego that
stands between desire and the meeting of desire, needs and the meeting
of needs. 

<sup>9.2</sup> The word “need” and the word “dependent” are only words
and words that would be inconceivable to you in the state of unity
before you left it. Now, they are just tools, as are many other means of
practice that assist you in bypassing your ego-mind. Some practices more
commonly thought of as tools might be meditation, exercises of the body
such as yoga, or exercises of the mind such as affirmations. These tools
are all means of releasing ego-mind and inviting the one mind, or unity
into the present moment. When seen as such, all these tools, including
needs, can ignite the combination of learning and unlearning, the
letting-go of one so that the other can arrive. 

<sup>9.3</sup> We are now beginning to speak of the second aspect of
treasure that was addressed in the beginning of this Treatise as
something found that is kept secure and cherished. This aspect of
treasure relates to your ability to let go. As many of you will find the
idea of letting go of special relationships among the most difficult of
ideas contained in this course of study, the ability to let go must be
further discussed. 

<sup>9.4</sup> When a need is filled, you have been accustomed to having
a reaction to this meeting of a need as if it takes place apart from
you, or from outside of you. You assign the meeting of a need to a
person or system or organization. You as often feel indebted as you feel
grateful for the meeting of needs. When your life is running smoothly
and needs are being continuously met, you begin to want to hang on to
the relationships that you feel met these needs *because* of their
ability to meet them. When your needs cease being met, you believe there
has been a loss such as with the loss of a job or loved one or even of
the promise of some service. When you think in such a way you believe in
loss and gain rather than in the replacement belief that there is no
loss but only gain. 

<sup>9.5</sup> It is perhaps best seen in the contrast implied by the
intent to hang on. The desire to hang on to anything assumes that what
you have is in need of protection or that it would not be secure without
your effort to keep it secure. Inherent in this assumption is the
concept of “having” or ownership. How does this relate to “having”
needs? By identifying needs in such a way, in the same way that you
identify “having” in regards to possessions, you but continue to feel as
if you “have” needs even long after they have been met. Since I have
already stated that you do have needs this may seem confusing. 

<sup>9.6</sup> In relationship, every need is met by a corresponding
need. It is a dance of correspondence. 

<sup>9.7</sup> All needs are shared. This is what differentiates needs
from wants.  This is true in two senses. It is true in that all needs,
from survival needs to needs for love are literally shared in the same
measure by all.  The other sense in which needs are shared is in the
aspect of correspondence. They are shared because they are known. Every
being inherently knows that it shares the same needs as every other
being of its kind. Every being also inherently knows that needs and the
fulfillment of needs are part of the same fabric—they are like puzzle
pieces that fit together. Other beings that share life with you on this
planet are not concerned with needs or need fulfillment. Doing what
needs to be done in order to survive is hardly the same as feeling that
one has a need. Needs are the domain of the thinking being only.
Thinking beings share needs because of the way in which they think. That
some seem to have more needs than others is a fallacy of perception. Not
one has more needs than another. 

<sup>9.8</sup> What is shared by all is not owned.  What all have is in
no danger of being taken away. All that you are capable of having you
already have as the already accomplished. All that you would give will
take nothing away from you. 

<sup>9.9</sup> This could be restated as the belief that there is no
loss but only gain. 

<sup>9.10</sup> The extent to which you deny your needs or are honest
about your needs makes the difference in your connection or separation
within relationship. The extent to which you are willing to abdicate
your needs in order to attain something is the extent to which your
belief in want or lack is revealed. This is the purview of special
relationships. Thus the very compromises you are often prone to make in
special relationships are but the symptoms of your fear. 

<sup>9.11</sup> As soon as you are content or self-satisfied, or, in
other words, feel your needs are met, the desire to hang on to what you
have arises.  This is true of knowledge, or what you know, and of who
you are, just as much as it is of special relationships and what you
might more readily think of as treasure, such as a successful career or
inspired creative project. 

<sup>9.12</sup> As soon as the desire to hang on arises, both learning
and unlearning cease to occur.  The desire to maintain a state you
believe you have achieved and have labeled a state in which your needs
are met creates a static level, that no matter how good or right or
meaningful, loses its creative nature by remaining static. 

<sup>9.13</sup> So how do you remain within the constant creative flux
or flow of creation without either constantly striving for more of what
you already have or for what you consider progress? You need a means of
disconnecting this drive that has become instinctual to you. As a being
existing in form, you have honed certain instincts over millennia, such
as the instinct to survive, in order to carry on in physical form. 

<sup>9.14</sup> There is no such thing as a static level in unity where
creation is continuous and ongoing. You should have no desire to reach
such a state and the awareness that you are in such a state can alert
you, or serve as a sign, that the ego-mind and its fear-based thinking
have momentarily returned. This does not mean that you will never be at
rest or that you will be constantly seeking to arrive. As has already
been said, you have arrived and rest exists only in the state of unity. 

<sup>9.15</sup> Because you have not thought previously of needs as
tools every bit as valuable as the others mentioned here, this
adjustment in your thinking may seem difficult to accept. How does the
identification of needs or the dependency inherent in relationships
bypass the ego-mind?  They heretofore have not, only because of your
perception of them as signals of what you are lacking. Once this
perception has shifted, your ego-mind will cease to be fed by these
concerns. What is food for the ego-mind is fear and the removal of these
final fears will quite literally starve the ego-mind out of existence.

<sup>9.16</sup> An understanding of the mutuality of needs will aid you
in being honest about your needs, thus allowing them to be met. Then the
need to define or to identify them ceases. Your needs only continue to
be brought to your awareness as needs until your trust in their
immediate and ongoing fulfillment is complete. Once this trust is
realized you will no longer think in terms of needs at all. Once you are
no longer concerned with needs and the meeting of needs you will no
longer be concerned with special relationships. You will realize that
there is no loss but only gain involved in letting them go. 

<sup>9.17</sup> Holding on to what you think will meet your needs is
like holding your breath. Your breath cannot long be held. It is only
through the inhaling and exhaling, the give and take of breathing that
you live.  Each time you are tempted to think that your needs can only
be met in special ways by special relationships, remember this example
of holding your breath. Think in such a way no longer than you can
comfortably hold your breath. Release your breath and release this fear
and move from special to holy relationship. 

<sup>9.18</sup> This phase of coming to accept need and dependency is
necessary only as a learning ground of experience on which trust can
grow. Once this trust is realized you will no longer think of trust just
as you will no longer think of needs. 

<sup>9.19</sup> Ceasing to think in these terms will soon be seen as a
valuable ability and a timesaving measure of great magnitude. As these
old ways of thinking leave you, you will be left as who you are in
truth.

