---
treatise: "A Treatise on The Nature of Unity and Its Recognition: The Second Treatise"
chapter: "4"
title: "Treatise 2, Chapter 4: The Call to Who You Are"
---

<sup>4.1</sup> Creation is not an aspect of this world alone. Creation
is an aspect of the whole, the all of all, the alpha and the omega,
eternity and infinity. It is not only life as you know it now, but life
in all its aspects. It is life beyond death as well as life before birth
and life during your time here. It is all one because it is all from the
same Source. 

<sup>4.2</sup> You are not only part of creation, but as has been said
many times, a creator, and as such a continuing act of creation. This
does not mean that creation is acted out upon you but that you are acted
out upon creation. The idea of creation as something static would be
completely contrary to the meaning of creation. Yet you continue to
think that you stand apart from it and affect it not. This is consistent
to the thinking that would tell you that you are at the mercy of fate.
Fate and creation are hardly the same thing. You are at the mercy only
of your own ego and only until you willingly let it go. 

<sup>4.3</sup> *A Course in Miracles* and *A Course of Love* work
hand-in-hand because the change of thinking taught within *A Course in
Miracles* was a change of thinking about yourself. It attempted to
dislodge the ego-mind that has provided you with an identity that you
but think you are. *A Course of Love* then followed in order to reveal
to you who you truly are. While you continue to act within the world as
who you *think* you are rather than as who you are, you have not
integrated these two pieces of learning. 

<sup>4.4</sup> This is the stage of learning that you are at and what
this Treatise addresses.  This Treatise is attempting to show you how to
live as who you are, how to act within the world as the new Self you
have identified. Just like learning how to swim, it is a new way of
movement.  Just as moving through water is a way of movement quite
inconsistent with that of moving on land, so too is the new way of
acting out or expressing who you are quite inconsistent with the way in
which you have formerly acted out or expressed who you are. This is, of
course, because you formerly acted out of a set of conditions that
corresponded to who you *think* you are rather than who you truly are. 

<sup>4.5</sup> You will almost literally continue to “bump into” who you
think you are as you complete the process of unlearning. It might be
best explained by continuing with the swimming metaphor. If acting in
the world as who you truly are is like swimming, bumping in to who you
think you are could be likened to trying to move within water as you
would on land. Why, when moving freely through the water would you
suddenly try to move as if on land? The explanation could be as simple
as forgetting where you are, or as complex as a sudden panic or fear
brought on by any number of factors. Either way, the result would always
be the same; a sudden change from ease of movement to struggle, from
going with the flow to resistance. 

<sup>4.6</sup> A first step then in learning to recognize when you are
acting upon notions of who you think you are rather than on who you
truly are, is the appearance of struggle or resistance. As a swimmer
quickly learns, the only way to return to ease of movement is to cease
to struggle or resist. The ability to let go of struggle is a learned
ability for the swimmer and is a learned ability for you now as you
journey back to your real Self. It requires remembrance, trust, and a
wholehearted approach that allows the body, mind and heart to act in
unison. This wholehearted approach is the condition from which unity is
recognized. The water is not taken for granted but always recognized as
the condition of the swimmer’s environment. You are no longer confined
to the conditions of separation, my dear brothers and sisters, and this
is what it is time for you to learn. 

<sup>4.7</sup> This applies directly to your *reaction* to all that
occurs within your life. Let us look now at your reaction to the idea
put forth earlier of having a calling. 

<sup>4.8</sup> Despite whatever way you currently have of identifying
calling as it relates to you there are few among you who have not
reacted to the idea of calling with two sets of feelings and thoughts.
One set of thoughts and feelings contain all that one might attribute to
the glad acceptance of a gift of high value, or in other words, a
treasure. One set of thoughts and feelings contain all that one might
attribute to the somewhat onerous onset of yet another responsibility,
another obligation. One set of thoughts recognizes that something has
been given. The other set recognizes that something has been asked. The
wholehearted response is one that recognizes that giving and receiving
are the same in truth. 

<sup>4.9</sup> While two sets of thoughts and feelings exist, the only
way to come to peace with them is through an acceptance of ambiguity.
While an acceptance of ambiguity might seem preferable to conflict, an
acceptance of ambiguity is a rejection of your power. What is required
to claim your power is the willingness to move through the conflict of
two opposing sets of thoughts and feelings to the place of unity. 

<sup>4.10</sup> Thus a first step in our work with regard to calling is
recognizing the dualistic nature of your thoughts and feelings. A second
step is willingness to move past both ambiguity and conflict to union. 

<sup>4.11</sup> This requires an examination of your specific notions
concerning calling as you apply them to yourself. Whether you feel that
you have a specific calling, no calling, or many callings, matters not
at this juncture. What matters is that you think it does.  You think it
matters because you compare and judge rather than accept.

<sup>4.12</sup> You who have so recently felt the peace of true
acceptance are not asked to leave that peace to go in search of calling
but are rather asked to listen from within that peace to what you feel
called to do.  This is not about the past and all those things that at
one time or another you thought would bring you fulfillment. This is
about recognizing who you are now. This is not a quick fix that calls
you to what might have been and tells you that if you had but acted
earlier you would have had the life you’ve dreamed of and maybe it is
not too late.  This is not about examining where the various calls you
responded to previously have led you. All these notions are concerned
with who you have thought yourself to be, not with who you are. They do
not recognize the difference between thinking and knowing.  

<sup>4.13</sup> Being who you are is what you are called to do. You are
here asked to live a life as seamless as that of the birds of the air.
You are asked to live a life where there is no division between who you
are and what you do. This place of no division is the place of unity. 

<sup>4.14</sup> Now you may feel as if this Treatise has led around in a
circle, bringing you back only to contemplate again the acceptance of
where you are now. However, to accept where you are is not the same as
accepting who you are. Accepting *where* you are, as if it is a static
place at which you have arrived, is not the goal that has been set.
Accepting *who* you are includes acceptance of creation. The acceptance
of creation is the acceptance of change and growth but neither of these
are concepts that you understand truly. Change is not negative and
growth does not imply lack. 

<sup>4.15</sup> You must be beginning to see that your thought
processes, the very thought processes that tell you hour-by-hour and
minute-by-minute how to perceive of and live in your world, are still
often based on old concepts. This does not mean you have not changed nor
that you are in need of accomplishment rather than the already
accomplished. What this means is that you are still in need of
unlearning, of undoing old patterns of thought. This is atonement and it
is continuous and ongoing until it is no longer needed. Anything
continuous and ongoing is part of creation. Thus the very act of undoing
old patterns is an act of creation. As the old is undone, a vacuum is
not created. The new is created. 

<sup>4.16</sup> You are in the process of unmaking what you have made.
The old structure is coming down so that the new, what might be likened
to a building with no frame, can rise. 

<sup>4.17</sup> This process too is union for it is giving and receiving
as one although you recognize it not as such. It is not a process of
waiting until one thing is accomplished for another to begin. What is
happening now is happening in unison. As the old goes, the new arrives.
There is no time-lapse in this learning and so it is a condition of
miracle readiness. The old is replaced by the new simultaneously. 

<sup>4.18</sup> This is why you do not have to “wait” to hear your
calling even though some of you may feel as if you are in a time of
waiting for you hear no such call. The call is to be who you are and
this is happening at lightning speed, a speed that cannot be measured
because of its simultaneous nature. As was said within *A Course of
Love*, time is but a measurement of the “time” it takes for learning to
occur.  As this notion of time dissolves, the state of miracle-readiness
becomes your natural state. 

<sup>4.19</sup> While this adjustment of your thinking may not seem to
be the miracle that it truly is, as your awareness of it grows, it is
going to raise it to a level you will come to think of as an ability. As
your old way of responding to life causes you to struggle or resist and
the new way of thinking replaces that old pattern with a new pattern of
response, you will begin to see that each new response is the answer to
a call that your heart alone can hear. As I have said, your heart has
now become your eyes and ears. Your heart hears only one call, one
voice, the language of one Source—that of unity.

