---
treatise: "A Treatise on The Nature of Unity and Its Recognition: The Second Treatise"
chapter: "12"
title: "Treatise 2, Chapter 12: The Belief: Correction and Atonement"
---

<sup>12.1</sup> Miracles are thoughts and I am the corrector of false
thinking. You have been made ready for this correction and your belief
in correction, or atonement, is the final belief that must be put into
practice.

<sup>12.2</sup> Miracles are a service provided through love. Your
readiness for miracles has been achieved through the learning you have
accomplished.  Miracles cannot be used, and so your learning needed to
include an ability to distinguish between service and use. Service, or
devotion, leads to harmony through right action. Until you were able to
distinguish the false from the true, you were not able to receive the
power of miracles. 

<sup>12.3</sup> The power of miracles is but the culmination and the
integration of the beliefs we have put forth here. The miracle I am
offering you here is the service I offer you, the precursor of the
service you will offer to others. 

<sup>12.4</sup> Miracles are intercessions. As such they are agreements.
They do not take away free will but free the will to respond to truth.
They are the ultimate acceptance of giving and receiving being one in
truth. 

<sup>12.5</sup> While you continue to feel as if you do not understand
miracles, you will be reluctant to believe in them or to see yourself as
a miracle worker. Your belief in miracles and your belief in atonement
or correction are the same thing. While you believe there is anything
other than your own thinking that is in need of correction you think
falsely.  Right-thinking is the realm of miracles.

<sup>12.6</sup> As with the learning goal being set here of going beyond
belief to simply knowing, the learning goal in relation to the miracle
is the same—it is one of going beyond belief in the miracle to simply
knowing.  Knowing is knowing the truth. Knowing is right-thinking. Your
return to knowing or right-thinking is both the miracle and the end for
the need of miracles. For as you live in the world as who you are, you
become a miracle and the constant expression of the miracle. 

<sup>12.7</sup> The power of thought and the power of prayer, once
aligned, call constantly upon the same power of intercession that is the
miracle. This is why we also devoted a fair amount of this Treatise to a
discussion of calling.  Calling is not only something you receive but
something you must learn to give. As you have come to see calling as a
gift and a treasure as well as a learning device, so you must come to
see your own ability to call forth intercession as a gift and treasure
you are able to give in service to your brothers and sisters. 

<sup>12.8</sup> If callings come to alert you to the treasure within,
how can it be that you, as a miracle-minded being, are not called upon
to also call forth the treasure that exists around you? When you call to
those whom you meet in relationship, you call but to the already
accomplished. 

<sup>12.9</sup> There, between you and the “other” whom you have
previously only perceived, is the relationship and the miracle waiting
to happen.  As we spoke within *A Course of Love* of relationship being
not one thing or another but a third something, this is what we speak of
here again. If Christ *is* relationship, and if the Christ *in* you is
the real you, then this all-encompassing relationship, both within you
and without you, both you and all you are in relationship with, is that
third something that is the holy relationship. 

<sup>12.10</sup> This holy relationship is what you are called to
cultivate as a gardener cultivates her garden. The gardener knows that
although the plant exists fully realized within its seed, it also needs
the relationship of earth and water, light and air. The gardener knows
that tending the garden will help it to flourish and show its abundance.
The gardener knows she is part of the relationship that is the garden. A
true gardener believes not in bad seeds. A true gardener believes not
that she is in control. A true gardener accepts the grandeur that is the
garden and finds it beautiful to behold. 

<sup>12.11</sup> This metaphor is akin to acceptance of the holy
relationship. It is acceptance of what occurs with the joining of many
factors, one no more important than another.  While the Christ in you
has been compared to the seed of all you are, what you have had revealed
to you here is that the Christ is also the relationship of all that
would bring the seed to fruition. The ego could be here compared to a
gardener who believes that the seed alone is all that is important. As
intently as this gardener might struggle to cause the seed to grow,
without the relationship of earth and water, light and air, the seed
would but remain a source of struggle. The ego would hang on to what is
already accomplished within you, never to let it express, through
relationship, all that it is. As valuable as the ego would tell you that
you are, it still would thwart you being who you are through its denial
of the relationships essential to that which you truly are.

<sup>12.12</sup> This cultivation then, of the all-encompassing holy
relationship that exists within you and without you, both in all you are
and all you are in relationship with, is how you are called to live your
life and the call you are asked to sound to all your brothers and
sisters.

<sup>12.13</sup> Let the beliefs we have set forth become one with you
so that they enable you to live and express and act as who you are in
every moment and in every circumstance. Let these abilities serve you
and your brothers and sisters. Let this way of living be the expression
of who you are and all that you now remember. Let this remembrance grow
and flourish as the garden that is you. 

<sup>12.14</sup> Recognize now that unity is within you and without you,
in all you are and all you are in relationship with. Feel the embrace
and the love that is this unity and know that it is you and me and our
Creator and all that was created.

