---
treatise: "A Treatise on The Nature of Unity and Its Recognition: The Second Treatise"
chapter: "3"
title: "Treatise 2, Chapter 3: To Answer the Call"
---

<sup>3.1</sup> Your life is already an act of creation. It *was*
created. All of it.  It exists, fully realized within you. Your work
here is to express it.  *You* are far more than your life here. *You*
created your life here in union with the one mind and one heart, in
union, in other words, with God. Everything you have ever wanted to be
*is*. Everything you have ever thought or imagined *is* and is reflected
in the world you see. The only difference between the life you are
living and the life you want lies in your willingness to express who you
are. 

<sup>3.2</sup> There would be no need for form if there had been no
desire for expression. Life is the desire to express outwardly what
exists within.  What I refer to so often here as being within, as if
“within” is a *place* in which something resides, is unity and it is the
*place* where being resides. It is the *place* or *realm* of one heart
and one mind. It is the place where everything already exists fully
realized. It is like a trunk full of treasure. Like a menu of
possibilities. All you must do is wholeheartedly recognize the treasure
you have already chosen to bring to the world. Your heart speaks to you
of this treasure and guides you to open the trunk and release it to the
world—to your world—to the human world. As I have said, in the realm of
unity where your being resides, this is already accomplished. Your link
between the realm of unity and the realm of physicality is your heart.
Your heart tells you of the *already accomplished* and bids you to
express it with your physicality, thus uniting the two realms through
expression. 

<sup>3.3</sup> Your mind exists in unity.  Your heart exists *where you
think you are*, thus providing the means for union between *where you
think you are* and where your being actually resides. Remember always
that your heart is where the Christ in you abides and that the Christ is
your identity.  Remember that it is the Christ in you that learns and
raises learning to the holiest of levels.  It is the Christ in you that
learns to walk the earth as child of God, as who you really are. 

<sup>3.4</sup> This was stated early in *A Course of Love* and is
returned to now for a specific reason. While the truth that it is the
Christ in you that learns may have been given little attention as you
began your learning, it cannot now be ignored. Now *you* have realized
your learning. *You* have begun to see the changes that your learning is
capable of bringing to your life. *You* have felt the peace and love of
the embrace. *You* know that you are experiencing something real and
learning something that is of relevance even within the daily life you
currently move through. Now you must fully recognize the distinction
between the ego-self that previously was the self of learning and
experience, and the Christ-Self that is now the Self of learning and
experience. You must take on the mantle of your new identity, your new
Self. 

<sup>3.5</sup> It is this recognition that you are now acting and living
in the world as your Christ-Self rather than as your ego-self that will
aid you in expression. Without expression, the return to unity that has
been accomplished will not be realized. 

<sup>3.6</sup> If you still balk at the idea that the Christ could be in
need of learning, then your idea of the Christ is still based on an old
way of thinking, as are your ideas of learning.

<sup>3.7</sup> Learning and accomplishment are not linear as you have
perceived them to be. If we return to the idea of talents this may be
easier to explain. If the ability to create beautiful music already
exists within you, you do not have to learn what beautiful music is,
only how to express it. If you see beauty within, you do not have to
learn what beauty is, only how to express it. Expression and creation
are not synonymous. Creation is a continuous and on-going expansion of
the same thought of love that brought life into existence. The seeds of
creation exist in everything and provide for continuing creation. Thus
the seeds of all that you can express exist “within” you, in the
creation that is you. The power of creation is released through your
choice, your willingness to express that aspect of creation. It is quite
literally true that the seeds of much of creation lie dormant within
you, already accomplished but awaiting expression in this realm of
physicality. 

<sup>3.8</sup> In this same way, then, Christ can be seen as the seed of
your identity.  Christ is the continuous and on-going expansion of the
same thought of love that brought life into existence. Christ is your
identity in the broadest sense imaginable. Christ is your identity
within the unity that is creation.

