---
treatise: "A Treatise on The Nature of Unity and Its Recognition: The Second Treatise"
chapter: "11"
title: "Treatise 2, Chapter 11: The Belief: We Exist in Relationship and Unity"
---

<sup>11.1</sup> The Christ in you *is* relationship. As you were told
within the pages of *A Course of Love*, you are a being who exists *in*
relationship.  This is how you were created and how you remain. This is
the truth of who you are and even, in your own terms, a fact of your
existence.  Earlier this was pointed out to you so that you would come
to accept who you are and so that you would extend forgiveness to
yourself and all you hold responsible for this truth. This forgiveness
has now extended in two distinct ways. First in forgiving your Creator
for creating you in such a way, and second in forgiving a world that has
taught you to want to be other than who you are. Now our aim is to show
you how to integrate the belief that you are a being who exists in
relationship into the living of your life. 

<sup>11.2</sup> Even though you no longer want to be other than who you
are, and even though you now have a much clearer understanding of who
you are, you will find living as who you are in the world difficult as
long as you perceive of others as living under the old rules, the laws
of man rather than the laws of God or love. It will seem all but
impossible to live in relationship when those around you are still
convinced of their separation and still seeking to glorify it. You will
still perceive of the world as operating under the laws of man and as
long as you perceive of the world in such a way you will be forced to
live by its laws. This will cause struggle and, as you now know that
struggle of any kind alerts you to the presence of ego, you will
continue to do battle with the ego rather than leaving it forever
behind. 

<sup>11.3</sup> Doing battle with the ego has become the preoccupation
of many gifted and learned people. This is the classic battle revealed
in all myths and tales of war and strife. It is the battle that in your
imaginings has extended even to the angels. The ego is the dragon that
must be slain, the evil of the despot to be toppled, the one-on-one
conflict of all heroes who would take sides and do battle. 

<sup>11.4</sup> You are called to peace, a peace that begins and ends
with ceasing to do battle with the ego. As the ego has been the known
identity of your existence until now, it will, in a sense, be forever
with you, much as the body that is your form will remain with you until
your death. But while your perception of your body as your identity and
your home has given way to an idea of it as a form that can be of
service to you and your expression, there is no service the ego can do
you. The ego is the one untruth, given many names and many faces and the
only thing given by you the power to do battle with the truth, or with
God. Remember now and always that you and God are one and that when you
invite to do battle with God you but battle yourself. 

<sup>11.5</sup> A God of love does not do battle, for truth needs no
protection.  The truth is not threatened by untruth.  The truth simply
exists as love exists and as you exist. When we say something is, this
is what it is of which we speak. When we say all truth is generalizable,
all needs are shared, all knowing is shared, this is of what it is we
speak. 

<sup>11.6</sup> All cannot be threatened by nothing.

<sup>11.7</sup> This is why we spent a fair amount of time addressing
needs in a way we had not previously addressed them. For only with your
understanding that all that is real is shared does the ego lose its
power. The ego was made from the belief in separation and all that
followed from it. Thus your true identity must be recreated from the
belief in unity that is inherent in the acceptance that you are a being
who exists in relationship. Separation is all that opposes relationship,
and the ego is all that opposes your true identity. 

<sup>11.8</sup> Yet, as has already been said, the ego, having been with
you from your earliest remembering, will continue to be with you, in the
way that all learned behaviors and ideas are with you, until it is
totally replaced by new learning. Learning thus must complement your new
beliefs, the ultimate goal of this learning being the end of the need
for beliefs at all. 

<sup>11.9</sup> This learning, then, must be seen for what it is. It is
the holiest of work and the final evidence of means and end being the
same. Your devotion to this learning must now be complete, your
willingness total, your way of learning that of a mind and heart joined
in wholeheartedness.

<sup>11.10</sup> Realize that when you think that this total reversal of
thought concerning yourself and your world will be difficult you are
listening to your ego. The Christ in you knows not of difficulty. 

<sup>11.11</sup> How can it be that we speak both of the Christ in you
and of Christ as being relationship itself? How can it be that we have
spoken of Christ being both wholly human and wholly divine? These
statements can only be true if there is no division between you and
relationship, if there is no division between the human and the divine. 

<sup>11.12</sup> Separate things must still exist in relationship. This
is the key to understanding the truth of these statements. For even
while you have chosen separation, this choice did not preclude the
existence of relationship and it is in relationship that union still
exists. If you had been able to choose separation without relationship,
then the image of yourself the ego has put forth would have been a true
image. But as life cannot exist apart from relationship, this choice was
not available and did not overturn the laws of God. The ego is but your
belief that this has occurred; that what could never be true has become
the truth. 

<sup>11.13</sup> So let us now, for the sake of continued learning,
speak of separation in a new way. Let us speak of separation as a state
that exists rather than as a state that does not exist. If you exist as
a separate being but your being is contingent upon relationship for its
existence, is this not the same thing as saying that you are a being who
exists in relationship? Is this not similar to saying that a living
human body does not exist without its heart? Is not what is essential to
a living body a fact of that bodyâ€™s existence? While this illustration
is not attempting to say that life does not exist apart from the body,
it is attempting to reveal, in an easily understandable way, that there
is a condition under which you are here and able to experience life as a
separate being. That condition is relationship and relationship is what
keeps you forever one with your Creator. 

<sup>11.14</sup> Here that relationship is being called Christ in order
to keep the holiness and importance of this relationship forever and
foremost in your mind. Here, that relationship has been given a name, as
we have given your relationship with your separate identity the name of
ego.  Here, we are asking you to choose the one real relationship and to
vanquish the one unreal relationship. 

<sup>11.15</sup> It is from these two separate ideas of relationship
that the concept of doing battle has emerged. This concept of doing
battle can only remain if you remain convinced that the ego is real. As
long as you believe that the ego is real, you will feel as if there are
two identities that exist within you and you will see yourself as doing
battle in countless ways and forms. There will never actually be a
battle going on between Christ and the ego, but you will perceive that
such battles exist. You will be prone to calling upon the Christ as your
higher self to defend you against the ego-self. This is highly akin to
your former notion of prayer and assumes that there is something real
that you need defense against or saving from. This is how the notion of
Christ as savior arose. This is the belief in a good self and a bad self
with Christ acting as conscience and defender of good and the ego acting
as devil and defender of evil. This is nonsense, or but a form of the
insanity that is prevalent still, even in your thinking. You do not
realize that this source of conflict is the source of all conflict that
seems real to you within your world. This battle of good and evil, while
you believe in it still, will be demonstrated before you just as it has
been from time immemorial. Is this what you would have continue? Does
this not but reveal to you a fraction of the power of your thinking and
its ability to shape the world you see? 

<sup>11.16</sup> An alternative to this insanity exists. The alternative
is removing all faith from your belief in the ego-self. The alternative
is replacing belief in an ego-self with belief in a Christ-Self. Total
replacement.  As long as you hang on to both identities the world will
not change and you will not know who you are. You may think you know,
and you may waste much time in perceived battles, valiantly fighting for
good to win out over evil. But this is not the new way and the lack of
value from this type of effort can surely now be seen. 

<sup>11.17</sup> I have said that the ego will remain with you as the
identity you have learned since birth until you replace it with new
learning. While you have learned much here, you may be thinking that
your ego is still very much with you, and wondering, if you have not yet
replaced it, how this miracle will come about. This replacement is
indeed a miracle and the very miracle you have been prepared for within
this course of learning.

