---
treatise: "A Treatise on The Nature of Unity and Its Recognition: The Second Treatise"
chapter: "7"
title: "Treatise 2, Chapter 7: The Belief: Giving and Receiving As One"
---

<sup>7.1</sup> We have talked much in this Course of your desire to be
independent without looking at the condition of dependency that you
consider its opposite. To be independent, you feel as if you must rely
only on yourself. Thus the connotation of reliance on others, or
dependence, has taken on a negative meaning specifically in contrast to
your desire to be independent. One of your greatest fears is thus of a
condition that causes you to be dependent or to rely on others. 

<sup>7.2</sup> Others are the great unknown of living in the world.
Others are those who are beyond your control, those who can influence
the course of your day or your life in ways you would not choose. Others
represent the accidents waiting to happen, love that is not returned,
the withholding of things you deem important. This fear that you feel in
relation to others is as true of those you hold most dear to you as it
is of those you would call strangers. It is the very independence of
others that makes your own independence seem so important to you.
Dependency is not consistent with your notions of a healthy self. What,
then, is the alternative? 

<sup>7.3</sup> The alternative is believing in giving and receiving as
one. 

<sup>7.4</sup> First let us replace your idea of “others” with the idea
of “relationship” that has been so often defined and repeated within
this Course. In order to believe in giving and receiving as one, you
must believe in relationship rather than in others. 

<sup>7.5</sup> Those you would view as others are separate from you.
Those you would view as being in relationship with you are not separate
from you.  The relationship is the source of your unity. That you exist
in relationship with all is a belief that you must now incorporate into
living. Further, you must remember that relationship is based on trust.
If you are dependent, or supported by others with whom you share a
trusting relationship, where is the negativity? Where is the cause for
fear? What is the hidden source of your feelings of lack or deprivation?
What is the hidden source of your desire to control?

<sup>7.6</sup> This source is the ego. Even now, the ego will take every
opportunity that arises to prove to you that independence is a far
better state than that of dependence. It will work diligently to
convince you that any course that tries to take away your independence
should be resisted. As long as you continue to listen to your ego you
will not understand giving and receiving as one and will not believe in
it. 

<sup>7.7</sup> This is the most difficult belief of all to integrate
into the living of your life.  Each time another thwarts you, you will
be tempted to believe that giving and receiving as one is not taking
place. Your previous pattern of behavior will be quick to assert itself
and you will feel resentment and claim that the situation is unfair. You
will be tempted to withhold as others withhold from you. 

<sup>7.8</sup> Is it not clear how important it is to living in peace
that this pattern be broken? Will you live in peace only until some
“other” breaks your peace? Only until some circumstance beyond your
control brings an unexpected conflict your way? 

<sup>7.9</sup> There is no function for control in unity. There is no
need for it.  Relationship is the only means through which interaction
is real, the only source of your ability to change that which you would
change. 

<sup>7.10</sup> Here is an idea not heretofore given much attention, the
idea of the desire for change.  Certainly there will continue to be
things within your life that are in need of change. As was stated in the
beginning of this Treatise, this Course has not called you to a static
state of sameness, an acceptance of who you are that does not allow for
change. But once you have become happier with who you are, you will, if
left un-schooled, turn your attention to others and to situations you
would have be different than they are. You will want to be a
change-agent. You will want to move into the world and be an active
force within it. These are aims consistent with the teachings of this
Course, but what will prevent you from following the patterns of old as
you go out into the world with your desire to effect change? 

<sup>7.11</sup> The only thing that will prevent this is your ability to
go out into the world and remain who you are. This relates to giving and
receiving being one in truth in a very concrete way. For to go out into
the world with the desire to give, either expecting to receive in
certain measure or to receive not at all, is to follow the old pattern,
a pattern that has been proven to not have any ability to change the
world. 

<sup>7.12</sup> To proceed into each relationship as who you truly are
is to bring everlasting change to each and every relationship, and thus
to all. 

<sup>7.13</sup> Again I return you to the early teachings of *A Course
of Love*, teachings concerning your desire to be good and to do good.
This is not about doing good works. This is about being who you are and
seeing the truth rather than the illusion that surrounds you. You
cannot, in other words, be a good person in a bad world. You cannot
effect change without, without having effected change within. You cannot
be independent and still be of service. For as long as you believe in
your independence you will not accept your dependence.  You will not
accept giving and receiving as one if you feel able only to give or as
if “others” have nothing you would receive. 

<sup>7.14</sup> This new attitude, then, includes accepting that you
have needs.  That you are a being who exists in relationship is the same
as saying you are a being who needs relationship. The only thing that
keeps you, in this new pattern, from being needy and dependent in an
unhealthy way, is that you believe in giving and receiving as one. You
believe, in other words, that your needs will be provided for, thus
ceasing to be needs. To deny that you are a being with needs is not the
aim of this Course. To come to believe that your needs are provided for
by a Creator and a creation that includes all “others” is to believe in
giving and receiving being one in truth. 

<sup>7.15</sup> Giving is not only about choosing what good and helpful
parts of yourself you will share with the world. It is also about giving
the world the opportunity to give back. It is about recognizing the
constant and ongoing exchange that allows needs to be met. It is
trusting that if you have a need for money or time or honesty or love,
it will be provided. 

<sup>7.16</sup> Trusting is not a condition or state of being that you
have heretofore seen as being an active one. Your attitude toward trust
is one of waiting, as if an active stance toward trust would be
*dis*trustful. You thus will often say that you trust when what you are
doing is hoping for a specific outcome. Real trust is not a trust that
waits and hopes but a trust that acts from who you truly are.  Real
trust requires the discipline of being who you are in every circumstance
and in every relationship. Real trust begins with your Self. 

<sup>7.17</sup> How often have you hidden thoughts and feelings because
you question whether they are legitimate thoughts and feelings? For some
of you this answer has changed greatly over time. But for many of you,
you have become less, rather than more forthcoming about your thoughts
and feelings since taking this Course. You have done so out of a desire
to be truthful, a desire to not express thoughts and feelings unworthy
of your real Self. You may have increasingly denied thoughts and
feelings you would judge as negative or bad. Or you may have, in your
desire not to judge others, kept yourself from speaking up in instances
where you previously would have stated an opinion. While these modes of
behavior, in themselves, are learning aids that prepare you for acting
with the certainty you seek, they again are not to be confused with the
true aims of this course of study. 

<sup>7.18</sup> Who you are cannot be denied in favor of who you “will
be.” Needs cannot be denied as a means of having them cease to be. You
who are beginning to realize that you have much to give, realize that
you have as much to receive and that receiving does not imply that you
are lacking! 

<sup>7.19</sup> The discipline required to be who you are is a
discipline that requires trust in Self and honesty in relationships.
Does this mean that you are required to express every thought and
feeling that comes your way? No, but this does mean that you bring the
thoughts and feelings that arise to the place within your heart that has
been prepared for them. You do not deny them. You bring them first to
your Self, to the Self joined in unity at the place of your heart. From
this place you learn to discriminate, to separate the false from the
true, for your ego thoughts cannot long abide in the holy place of your
heart. Then, with truth and illusion separated, you develop the
discipline to express your true Self, as you are now. This is the only
way the Self you are now has to grow and change. This is the only means
the Self you are now has of giving and receiving as one. This is the
only means available to you to replace the old pattern with the new. 

<sup>7.20</sup> The recognition that giving and receiving occur as one
is a precondition for your recognition of the state of unity. As with
the recognition of your accomplishment, the acceptance of the belief
that giving and receiving are one in truth changes the function of time
as you know it. There is not a period of waiting or a period of time
between giving and receiving. There is not a time-lapse between the
recognition of needs and the meeting of needs. It is accepted that
giving and receiving occur in unison, thus further collapsing the need
for time. 

<sup>7.21</sup> While as stated previously, this belief will at times
seem difficult to put into practice, and while your recognition of
receiving and of needs being met may seem to still take time, this
belief builds on the belief of the already accomplished through
experience. As you experience giving and receiving being one in truth,
your belief will become true conviction. Your ability to recognize
giving and receiving as one becomes simply an aspect of your identity
and accepted as the nature of who you are in truth.

