---
treatise: "A Treatise on The Nature of Unity and Its Recognition: The Second Treatise"
chapter: "10"
title: "Treatise 2, Chapter 10: The Belief: We Only Learn in Unity"
---

<sup>10.1</sup> You would have to work mightily to turn the lessons of
this Course into a tool, but many of you will not tire of this work
until you succeed. This is how truths become dogma and dogma becomes
tyranny. This happens by accepting a static state. A static state is not
a living state because creation is not occurring within it. This is a
living Course. This is why you are called to live it rather than to take
it.  This is why you are called to be a teacher and a learner both. This
is how the exchange of giving and receiving as one occurs. This exchange
is unity. 

<sup>10.2</sup> Thinking that needs can be met only in certain ways is
akin to another belief that has been replaced. This belief was first
expressed in *A Course in Miracles* by the saying *resign as your own
teacher*. This belief in the self as teacher has now been replaced with
the belief that you only learn in unity. 

<sup>10.3</sup> I ask you to think for a moment of a time when you
attempted to recall a specific memory. This may have been a memory of a
name or address, of a dream, or an attempt to recall a specific event.
At such times, you often feel as if, just as the memory is about to
return to you, it is swatted away as easily and routinely as a hand
swats away a fly. You know that the information is contained within you
and yet you are often forced to accept an inability to have access to
this information. It is forced from your awareness by something you know
not.  It is there and yet swatted away as if by some unseen hand. Where
has this information gone and what keeps it from you?  You might feel
frustrated with your memory at such a time and even say something such
as “my brain just isn’t working right today.” I want you now to keep
this example in mind as we explore learning in unity.

<sup>10.4</sup> You might think of unity as you have so often thought of
your brain, but rather than thinking of it in the singular, think of it
as a storehouse or giant brain in which all that has ever been known or
thought is contained. The technology that has created super-computers
will immediately come to mind from this illustration. While this
illustration may be distasteful to some and intriguing to others, how
many of you would not want to replace your ability to know with the
ability of that of a supercomputer? 

<sup>10.5</sup> While just an illustration, the reverse of this is akin
to what you have done by replacing unity with singularity. You have
narrowed your ability to know to an ability to know that which you have
experienced.  While what we are speaking of as knowing has little to do
with the information stored in supercomputers, it is still a worthy
illustration.  For just as a supercomputer needs a knowledgeable
operator in order to provide the information sought, so too do you need
to become knowledgeable in order to access all that is available to you. 

<sup>10.6</sup> Just as needs have been shown to be shared in like
measure by all, so too is true knowing. Just as needs were shown to be
distinguishable from wants by a discussion of their shared nature, so
too now must knowing be distinguished from what you consider
intelligence. 

<sup>10.7</sup> While you are being told that you can no longer believe
that what you know is related to experience, you are not being told that
you have exactly the same knowledge as does every person of every
variety and level of experience. Yet no one can know more of the truth
than another, and no one can know less. 

<sup>10.8</sup> Just beyond your mind’s ability to call it forth lies
the truth that you and all other beings know. The access to what seems
to lie beyond your ability lies in the Christ in you. You might think of
the ego as the hand that swats away this knowing. 

<sup>10.9</sup> The ego is the teacher you have relied upon when you
have relied upon yourself as your own teacher. 

<sup>10.10</sup> You forget constantly that the Christ in you is the
learner here.  What need is there for a computer brain or for the ego to
be teacher when the learner in you is the all-powerful? The learner in
you is the unifying force of the universe. The learning you are in need
of is the learning that will call who you are back to your united mind
and heart.  This is the knowing that already exists, the memory that is
swatted away by the ego.

<sup>10.11</sup> Why, then, is this called learning? Learning simply
means to come to know. If what you know has been forgotten, you still
are in need of the learning that assists you in coming to know once
again. 

<sup>10.12</sup> But as long as you continue to attempt to learn with
your ego, or in other words, as long as you would continue to attempt to
learn in the same way that you have previously learned, you will not
learn because the “you” that will be involved in the learning process
will not be the real you.

<sup>10.13</sup> The Christ in you is the real you. The Christ in you is
the Self who you become when you have united heart and mind once again
in wholeheartedness. Thus the union of mind and heart is, as was stated
previously, the first union, the union that must precede all the rest.
You are in a state of unity when you have achieved wholeheartedness. You
are in a state in which you are able to learn. I am here to show you the
way to the Christ in you. I began my teaching by appealing to your heart
so as to ready you for the return of wholeheartedness, the state of
union in which all that you learn is shared, first by mind and heart,
and then in unity with your brothers and sisters. You achieve this state
only by listening to one voice, or, in other words, by ending the
separated state which is the state in which the ego exists. The end of
the separated state or the ego, is the beginning of your ability to hear
only one voice, the voice we all share in unity. 

<sup>10.14</sup> This voice speaks to you in a thousand ways. It is the
voice of love, the voice of creation, the voice of life. It is the voice
of certainty that allows you to move through each day and all the
experiences within it as who you are in truth. It releases you from the
feeling of needing to control or protect your treasure. It releases you
as well from the static state of trying to hang on to who you were
yesterday, or trying to prevent change tomorrow. 

<sup>10.15</sup> As was said in the beginning, it is realized that it is
hard for you to believe that the Christ in you is in need of learning.
Think a moment of why this should be so. Is there ever a moment in which
coming to know is not appropriate? Is there any reason that coming to
know should not be seen as something continuous and ongoing? 

<sup>10.16</sup> Again your desire for a static state would make you
rather listen to your ego as it prescribes learning for certain
circumstances that would be quickly put behind you or chosen for
specific outcomes.  While many love to learn for the sake of learning
alone, still they would be loath to give up or let go the ability to
choose their lessons.  And still we are only talking about learning as
you have perceived of it rather than learning from life. 

<sup>10.17</sup> What difference does it make to your concepts of
learning when you think of life as your coursework?  Would you be any
more willing to let another choose your lessons for you? 

<sup>10.18</sup> What are your plans and dreams but chosen lessons?
While you do not think of them as such you do not think of life as your
learning ground. You still think of lessons as being about specific
subject matter. When life does not go as you have planned, you feel as
if your chosen path has been denied to you. You often feel a sense of
loss and rarely one of gain. Unless life goes the way you have intended
for it to go, you do not feel gifted or blessed even when you may have
looked back often on situations that did not go as you had planned and
nevertheless gifted you with experiences or opportunities that would not
have arisen had your chosen plan come to fruition. 

<sup>10.19</sup> The Christ in you has no need to plan. A need to come
to know, yes. But a need to plan, no. The Christ in you needs not for
you to choose a lesson plan, but to let life itself be your chosen way
of learning.

