---
treatise: "A Treatise on The Personal Self: The Third Treatise"
chapter: "9"
title: "Treatise 3, Chapter 9: To Dwell in the House of Truth"
---

<sup>9.1</sup> This idea is an idea of love. It is an idea that makes
perfect sense and it is its very sense that makes it seem meaningless in
a world gone mad. It is an idea that says *only that which comes from
love is real*. It is an idea that says *only that which fits within the
laws of love is reality*. It is an idea that says *all that love would
not create does not exist*. It is an idea that says that *if you live
from love and within love’s laws you will create only love*. It is an
idea that accepts that this can be done and can be done by you in the
here and now. To accept these ideas without accepting their ability to
be applied is to change your beliefs without changing your ideas. This
many have done. This you surely do not want to do. 

<sup>9.2</sup> While you cannot now see the chain of events that will
make these ideas into a new reality, you can trust that they will be
there, spreading out like a web, much as the ego’s ideas of separation
once did. Yet, as these ideas are not learned ideas, they will not take
time, as did the ego’s ideas, to spread through learning.

<sup>9.3</sup> Ideas of love, or the truth, are joined in unity and
exist in relationship. All of the ideas within the house of illusion
were contained within it and held together by the learned ideas of the
ego thought system. Now you must imagine yourself walking outside of the
doors of this house of illusion and finding a completely new reality
beyond its walls. You might think, at first, that you are in a place so
foreign that you must immediately begin to learn again, starting with
the smallest building blocks of knowledge, as if learning a new
alphabet. Yet you soon will find that this new reality is known to you
and requires no new learning at all. You will be tempted, at first, to
see things that are like unto those within the house of illusion and
call them what you called them once before. But here you will find
yourself gently corrected and when this correction is given you will not
doubt it but will remember that it is the truth you had forgotten.

<sup>9.4</sup> You will see that the house of illusion was just a
structure built within the universe of truth and that the universe of
truth contains everything within its benevolent embrace. No one stands
beyond the embrace of love and you will be glad to see that those who
remain within the house of illusion could not escape love’s presence. 

<sup>9.5</sup> You will be tempted, nonetheless, to re-enter the house
of illusion, if only to grasp the hands of those you love and gently tug
them through its doors.  You will be able to take note of the explosions
happening within and will want to return to add your own to those going
on inside, thinking that with the force of one more, maybe the walls
will finally come tumbling down and those inside be held within illusion
no more.  This was the work of many who came before you but the time of
such work, for you, is past. Many remain to shake the walls of illusion.
Few stand beyond it to beckon to those within. 

<sup>9.6</sup> The paradise that is the truth seems to lie far beyond
the house of illusion in the valley of death. Survivors of near death
experiences have eased the fears of many but made many more long for
life after death rather than life. You who have followed me beyond the
walls of the house of illusion are now called to begin the act of
revealing and creating anew the life of heaven on earth. 

<sup>9.7</sup> This is the pilgrimage I set you upon, as real as those
who in the time of Moses journeyed through the desert to the Promised
Land. That journey remained metaphorical because it did not pass beyond
the arena of beliefs into the arena of ideas. The Israelites believed in
a Promised Land but they did not dwell in it. You are called to dwell in
the Promised Land, the House of Truth.

