---
treatise: "A Treatise on The Personal Self: The Third Treatise"
chapter: "18"
title: "Treatise 3, Chapter 18: Observation"
---

<sup>18.1</sup> You may wonder rightly then, how those who have not
learned by the Holy Spirit will learn. They will now learn through
observation. 

<sup>18.2</sup> Let us return to the concept of observation and link it
with ideas as we have spoken of them here. Observation, the ability to
observe what the Self expresses, was part of the original choice for
physical form.  The word *observance* has rightly been linked with
divine worship and devotion. Minds that have been unwilling to accept or
learn an unobservable truth, will now accept and learn from observable
truth.  This is why you must *become* that observable truth. 

<sup>18.3</sup> Observance happens in relationship, the very
relationship that disallowed the making of a separate self. Observance
is linked to cause and effect being one. What is observed is in
relationship with the observer and this relationship causes an effect.
Because this was part of the original choice for the physical
experience, it is a natural choice to serve our new purpose of the
miracle that will allow you to exist as who you are in human form. See
what perfect sense this makes as your human form is an observable form.
It is thus from observable form that the final learning will take place.
This is the perfect example of using what you have made for a new
purpose. It is the perfect ending for the desired experience, as it was
the goal of the desired experience.

<sup>18.4</sup> Expressing who you are in physical form will return
remembrance to the minds of *those who observe* your expression.
Further, *your observance* of your brothers and sisters will return
remembrance to their minds and hearts. It is, in fact, your observance
of the truth of your brothers and sisters that is the miracle we have
stated as our new goal. 

<sup>18.5</sup> I repeat, your observance of the truth of your brothers
and sisters is the miracle. 

<sup>18.6</sup> If you observe health rather than disease, abundance
rather than poverty, peace rather than conflict, happiness rather than
sadness—disease, poverty, conflict and sadness will be no more real to
your brothers and sisters than it is to you. 

<sup>18.7</sup> A mind and heart joined in unity observes the truth
where once a mind and heart separated by illusion observed illusion. 

<sup>18.8</sup> It will seem at first as if you are asked to deny the
facts that you see before you in order to observe something other than
what is there. You must constantly remember that your observance is now
an act of worship and of devotion and that you are called to observe the
truth rather than illusion no matter how real illusion may still seem to
be. 

<sup>18.9</sup> In this way, you will join the mechanisms of your
physical form to the new thought system of the truth.  Your body, as has
been often said, is a neutral form that will serve you in the manner in
which you choose to have it serve you. It has always been led by your
thought system. If it is no longer instructed by the thought system of
illusion, it is natural to realize that it will now be instructed by the
thought system of the truth. Thus your eyes will learn to observe only
the truth, even unto seeing what before but seemed unobservable.  

<sup>18.10</sup> We also now link observance and ideas. Ideas form in
the mind. You are used to thinking that what you observe forms outside
of your mind.  This is the thinking of the ego-thought system. The
thought system of the truth realizes that the external world is but a
reflection of the internal world. Thus you can observe with your eyes
closed as easily as you can observe with your eyes open. You can observe
by having an idea of another’s health, abundance, peace, and happiness.
You can *observe* this within yourself because it exists within your
Self. What exists within you is shared by all. This is the relationship
of the truth that unites all things and that must now become observable.

