---
treatise: "A Treatise on The Personal Self: The Third Treatise"
chapter: "13"
title: "Treatise 3, Chapter 13: The Practice: No Loss But Only Gain"
---

<sup>13.1</sup> Now that we have established the consistency of our
former purpose, that of establishing your identity, and our new purpose,
that of the miracle that will allow you to exist as who you are in human
form, we may proceed unencumbered by any doubt you might have had
concerning whether or not you would desire the new goal toward which we
work.

<sup>13.2</sup> We proceed by further defining the temptations of the
human experience. In “A Treatise on the Art of Thought,” we spoke of
these temptations in regards to extremes of the human experience, saying
that these things that draw you from the peace of God draw you from the
state in which you are aware of who you are, and so cause you to be
aware only of a self of human experience, or a personal self. While you
may still feel a connection to God during such times, you will not be
dwelling within the peace of God. Your Self and God will be but memories
to you while your reality remains that of the physical experience and
the personal self. In such times you can conceive only of a God outside
of yourself and trust not in the benevolence of the experience, whether
it be an extreme experience of pain or of pleasure. You begin to fear
that pleasure will end or that pain will not end. Once fear has entered,
doubt and guilt are never far behind. 

<sup>13.3</sup> These temptations will concern you less and less as we
uncover their true meaning by looking beyond the experiences themselves
to the cause. 

<sup>13.4</sup> Broad brushstrokes have been made now, giving you the
beginnings of a vision of a life in physical form that will not include
the very temptations we are beginning to lay out. Because you have made
these things that would but seem to tempt you, you have believed in them
and their ability to affect you. You have unlearned many of these
lessons and need not repeat unlearning that has been accomplished. The
new learning that lies ahead of you now is simply learning in accordance
with the new thought system of the truth; accepting the truth and
leaving illusion behind. The new thought system is simple to learn. What
is of love is truth. What is of fear is illusion. The temptation is to
see love where it is not and to not see fear where it is. But your
ability to distinguish between love and fear as cause is all that is
important now as you will create the new according to what you believe
to be the truth and translate into ideas.

<sup>13.5</sup> Remember now that pleasure and pain as perceived by the
body are from the same source. That source has not been the body but
your beliefs about your body and yourself. You have believed pleasure to
come at a cost, the cost of pain. You have believed in the laws of man,
laws that were made to perpetuate the idea that you must pay for
everything, or earn everything that you would care to make your own, and
then that you must protect what you have against those who would take it
away.

<sup>13.6</sup> This is a simple place to start because each of you are
tempted to hang on to this idea despite all that it has cost you. To
replace this idea with the idea of there being no loss but only gain
under the laws of love, is to resist the temptation of requiring
yourself to pay for what you gain. 

<sup>13.7</sup> I say this is a simple place to start because you can
put this new idea into practice today and every day by simply refusing
the temptation to believe in concepts such as earning and paying. How
you implement this idea will be your choice. But the idea that you do
not have to earn your way nor pay your way must be birthed and lived by.
While most of you will immediately think of your survival needs, this is
far from the only area in which the idea of earning or paying your way
can be found.  This old idea is consistent with all beliefs of an “if
this then that” nature. You might start practicing this idea by
repeating these words to yourself:

<sup>13.8</sup> “I am safe and nothing that I do or do not do will
threaten my safety.”

<sup>13.9</sup> As you say these words you will realize that you do
believe in them. You believe, but you cannot *imagine* the truth of
these words really being represented in the life you live here. This you
must now do. You must represent the truth of these words with your life. 

<sup>13.10</sup> You are not, however, meant to test these words with
foolish acts.  To do so would be to act as if this were magic rather
than the truth. To act as if this is the truth is what you are called to
do. You may even begin by something as simple as choosing one thing a
day that you will change to reflect the fact that you have accepted this
new idea. Choose an act that will cause you no fear to begin with. For
instance, you might tell yourself something such as this: “I have an
idea that if I sleep as long as I feel I need to sleep in the morning, I
will awake refreshed and ready for my day and no dire consequences will
befall me from this action.” Another act might be as simple as allowing
yourself to freely spend a small amount of money each day that you
ordinarily would not spend, always with the idea in mind that this will
not affect your budget in any negative respect.

<sup>13.11</sup> While these examples may seem so simple that you regard
them as little more than the self-help kind of advice I have said this
Course would not provide, they are but aids to help you in the
development of your own ideas. If you remember that all of your ideas
are to be based on love, you will not fail to birth ideas of
consequence. 

<sup>13.12</sup> The second aspect of this lesson will then be regarding
your ideas about the consequences that seem to result from whatever
action your ideas have suggested. You must birth the idea of having no
reason to fear these consequences, no matter what they may be. You must,
in truth, birth the idea of benevolence and abundance. 

<sup>13.13</sup> Notice that the simple examples I gave were examples of
action.  Ideas can certainly be birthed without the need for action, but
one of the factors that distinguishes an idea from a belief is a
requirement of action. That action, while not necessarily physical, is
the action of giving birth. Realize that you believe in many things that
did not originate with yourself. But it is not until you have your own
ideas about those beliefs that you own those beliefs in terms of making
them *your* beliefs. To believe without forming your own ideas about
your beliefs is to be in danger of succumbing to false beliefs. 

<sup>13.14</sup> To form your own ideas is to be creative. Forming your
own ideas happens in relationship. Taking action on your ideas forms a
relationship between your physical form and your Self as your physical
self represents, in form, the thought or image produced within the Self.
Ideas, in the context in which we are speaking of them here, are
thoughts or images originating from the Self and being represented by
the personal self. It is only in this way that the personal self will be
able to represent the Self in truth.

