---
treatise: "A Treatise on The Personal Self: The Third Treatise"
chapter: "12"
title: "Treatise 3, Chapter 12: The Physical Self in the House of Truth"
---

<sup>12.1</sup> Consciousness is a state of awareness. The statement “I
am” is a statement of awareness of consciousness. Awareness preceded the
statement of “I am.” “I am” preceded the creation of the Self. The Self
preceded the establishment of the personal self. 

<sup>12.2</sup> You exist within the *time* of consciousness of the
personal self.  Thus we begin our work with the personal self while also
realizing that the personal self is a step in the chain of
consciousness. The steps that came before that of the personal self did
not come *within* time. The creation of *time* was simultaneous with the
creation of the personal self. Because the steps that came before that
of the personal self did not come in time, they are eternal, eternal
levels of consciousness that still exist and have always existed. 

<sup>12.3</sup> Temptations of the human experience exist only in time.
What we are about to do is move the human experience out of the realm of
time. For this to happen, we must remove the time-bound temptations of
the human experience of the personal self. 

<sup>12.4</sup> Matter or form is bound by time. Spirit is not. The
House of Truth cannot be bound by time and be a House of Truth. How then
can the personal self begin to realize the human experience outside of
time? The answer is thus: by changing the consciousness of the personal
self from a time-bound state of consciousness to an eternal state of
consciousness. This change, as has been said before, is the miracle.
This miracle is the goal toward which we now work. 

<sup>12.5</sup> Realize that prior to this point, our goal was returning
to your awareness the truth of your identity. By changing our goal now,
I am assuring you that you have become aware of the truth of your
identity.  The goal of this Course has been accomplished. However, while
your consciousness remains time-bound, your awareness is still limited.
As has already been stated, in order to remove the limits that continue
to exist, we must remove all time-bound temptations. 

<sup>12.6</sup> These temptations are not temptations of the body. They
may seem to be, but the body is neutral. All temptations originate in
the mind and are transferred to the body. Temptations do not originate
from love.  While some temptations will seem to be of love they are not. 

<sup>12.7</sup> As it dawns upon your once slumbering mind that change
on a grand scale awaits you, you will grow fearful if you do not realize
that what is being proposed to you here is something completely new,
something you have not even dreamed of. This state you have not even
dared to dream of is a state in which only God’s laws of love exist even
within the realm of physicality. What this means is that all that in
this human experience has come of love will be retained. All that will
be lost is what has come of fear. 

<sup>12.8</sup> Let’s return a moment to the choice that was made for
the human experience, the choice to express who you are in the realm of
physicality. You were not “better” or more “right” before this choice
was made than you are now. You made a choice consistent with the laws of
creation and the steps of creation outlined above. From this choice,
many experiences ensued. Some of these experiences were the result of
fear, some the result of love. The choice to express who you are in
physical terms was not a choice made of fear but made of love. A
physical self is not inconsistent with the laws of God or of creation.
It is simply a choice. 

<sup>12.9</sup> The life of the physical self became a life of suffering
and strife only because the physical or personal self forgot that it
exists in relationship and believed itself to be separate and alone. In
its fear, it made an ego-self which, because it sprang from fear, was
not consistent with the laws of Love or of creation.  Knowing it existed
in a state inconsistent with that of the laws of God, it made of God a
being to be feared, thus continuing, and being unable to find release
from, the cycle of fear. 

<sup>12.10</sup> What would be a greater step in all of creation than a
physical self able to choose to express the Self within the laws of
love? A physical self, able to express itself from within the House of
Truth in ways consistent with peace and love is the next step in
creation, the rebirth of the Son of God known as the resurrection. 

<sup>12.11</sup> While this would seem to say that mistakes may occur
within creation, remember that creation is about change and growth.
There is no right or wrong within creation but there are stages of
growth and change. Humankind is now passing through a tremendous stage
of growth and change. Are you ready?

