---
treatise: "A Treatise on The Personal Self: The Third Treatise"
chapter: "5"
title: "Treatise 3, Chapter 5: Original Purpose"
---

<sup>5.1</sup> While you have just been told that you now exist in a
state of emptiness, this is not a state to be feared. Yet it is this
fear of emptiness that has, in the past, made those who have experienced
it rush to find the easiest and most available replacement (the ego or
that which has become familiar, if not known). While few of you have
ever before reached the emptiness caused by the complete absence of the
ego, just as few of you have never felt some sort of absence. All the
lessons you have drawn to yourself in your lifetime have worked toward
this absence in the hopes of filling the emptiness with the fullness of
the truth. 

<sup>5.2</sup> As with the gentle learning of this Course, not all
emptiness has come to you at the hands of suffering. Each time you have
“fallen” in love you have emptied a space for love to fill. Each time
you have felt true devotion you have emptied a space for love to fill.
You have been emptied of the ego-self as creative moments of inspiration
filled you and emptied of the ego-self in moments of connection with
God.

<sup>5.3</sup> Conversely, you have been emptied by the lessons of grief
as the loss of love has led to a loss of self. You have been emptied by
a loss of self due to illness or addiction, depression, or even physical
exhaustion. All these things you have brought to yourself for they have
been the only way past the ego’s guarded gate. 

<sup>5.4</sup> You have tried to live in a house built on a faulty
foundation, attempting to make do with what you have. All your time was
spent in making repairs and this time spent kept you too busy to see the
light that was always visible through the cracked and peeling walls that
you built. That you would eventually call to yourself a fire that would
burn these walls to ash or a flood that would wash them away, was as
much a part of the survival mechanism of your real Self as was the rush
to rebuild a part of the survival mechanism of the ego-self. 

<sup>5.5</sup> All this you have already tried to do.  These lessons you
have already tried to learn. This Course has come so that these many
things that you have tried need not be repeated, just as the crucifixion
came to end the need to learn through suffering and death. 

<sup>5.6</sup> The story that I lived was appropriate for the time in
which I lived it, and has an appropriateness that continues even now. I
walked the earth in order to reveal a God of love. The question of the
time, a question still much in evidence, was how mighty could God’s love
be if it were given to a people who suffered. The answer was that God’s
love was so mighty that he would even allow the death of his only son to
redeem the world. 

<sup>5.7</sup> The death of an only son, then as now, would be seen as a
sacrifice of enormous proportions; the greatest sacrifice of all. The
point of the story, however, was not one of sacrifice but one of gift
giving. The greatest gift of all was given, the gift of redemption. The
gift of redemption was the gift of an end to pain and suffering and a
beginning of resurrection and new life. It was a gift meant to empty the
world of the ego-self and to allow the personal self to live on as the
one true Self, the one true son of God. The gift of redemption was given
once and for all. It is the gift of restoration to original purpose.
Without there having been an original purpose worthy of God’s son, the
crucifixion would have ended life in form and returned the sons of man
to the formless. Instead, the sons of man were freed to pursue their
original purpose. 

<sup>5.8</sup> This story has been repeated endlessly in time, in time
extending both forward and back. Each father’s son will die. This means
not what you have taken it to mean, an endless series of generations
passing.  What this means is that in each the ego will die and the Self
be reborn to life eternal. Without rebirth of the Self, the original
purpose goes unfulfilled. Since God is original purpose, original cause,
the origin of Self and of relationship, original purpose cannot go
unfulfilled.  What this means is that the illusion will be no more and
truth will reign. Such is the reign of God.

