---
treatise: "A Treatise on The Personal Self: The Third Treatise"
chapter: "20"
title: "Treatise 3, Chapter 20: Suffering and Observance"
---

<sup>20.1</sup> By saying that there is no longer any time to be wasted
on illusion we are saying that you will no longer serve time but that
time will serve you. Time was wasted on illusion and so but seemed to
become a master that made of you a slave. Now time must be thought of in
a new way, a way that has to do with effectiveness. Illusion has at its
base a false cause and so no effects that exist in truth. Now, your
every thought and action will have effect, and the choices that lie
before you will be choices of where your thoughts and actions will have
the *greatest* effect. 

<sup>20.2</sup> Although there was no sense to be made of concepts such
as *more or less* within illusion, and although *more or less* are
concepts also foreign to the truth, there is sense to be made from these
concepts in regards to the learning of the truth. As this is all that
time is for, and all that time is but a measurement of, it rightly
follows that learning can take place at a slow pace or a fast pace.
There is no more or less to learning in terms of knowing the truth that
you have always known, but there are degrees of remembering and since
this is what we work to have occur, time can become our ally by using it
for effectiveness. 

<sup>20.3</sup> Again, do not let your thoughts stray to benefiting and
affecting others. In unity, all others are one with you and thus what
you strive for in effectiveness is your own learning. Now, rather than
learning the truth, you are learning how to live by the truth. This will
benefit you and in so doing benefit all others. 

<sup>20.4</sup> In “A Treatise on the Art of Thought,” you were asked to
request a miracle as a learning device. This learning device had two
aspects. The first was to reveal to you your fears concerning the
miracle so that you would learn from them. The second was to assure you
that the miracle is the most effective way of convincing you of who you
are. 

<sup>20.5</sup> Let us now link observation and the miracle. An easy
illustration is provided, as so often is the case, by looking at
observation under the guidance of the ego-thought system and thus seeing
the errors of the old way in order to realize the perfect sense of the
new. 

<sup>20.6</sup> Think about a situation in which you have observed the
illness or suffering of another. Sympathy is the most common observance
in such a circumstance. You might feel called to tears, to words that
acknowledge how “bad” the illness or suffering is. You are likely to be
drawn into discussions concerning how the illness or suffering can be
“fought.” You are likely to hear questions concerning why the illness or
suffering has come to be and to hear or offer comments about the
unfairness of the situation. Judgment is never far from these
observations. Suffering, you would think, could not be seen as anything
but “bad.” You cannot feel anything but “sorry” for the one suffering.
Yet you are always drawn, despite these feelings of the “badness” of the
situation, to offer encouragement. If the situation is particularly
grim—and realize that this too is a judgment, for some illnesses and
suffering are surely seen as being worse than others—encouragement is
given despite the “fact” that it is unwarranted.  Yet even while you
offer encouragement, you worry about giving “false” hope and wonder how
realistic you should be or should assume the other to be. You look
ahead, and in your mind’s eye you “observe” the future as a repetition
of the present or as a long war with little chance of being won. You
chide yourself not to deny the facts, and you begin, along with the one
whom you observe, the long walk toward death’s door.  All of these
actions could be called your “observance” of the situation.

<sup>20.7</sup> You do not seem to realize that all of this is happening
in relationship and that the relationship is meaningful or able to cause
effect. You can’t imagine not feeling “bad” given such circumstances.
You cannot imagine not offering sympathy. You think it naïve to believe
in positive outcomes. You listen to statistics of what has occurred
before and in similar situations, and you believe in what the statistics
would seem to tell you. You might “thank God” for technology that would
seem to offer hope, or for drugs that would ease suffering, and you
might pray that God spare this one from a future seemingly already
written, and think that is more realistic and even helpful than living
by the laws of truth. 

<sup>20.8</sup> You will see it as quite difficult at first to respond
to such situations in a new way, but all situations within the house of
illusion call for the same response, the response of love to love. Why
think you it is loving to believe in suffering? Do you not begin to see
that in so doing you but reinforce it? What you might even call the
“fact” of it?  Can you not instead ask yourself what harm could be done
by offering a new kind of observance? 

<sup>20.9</sup> While you need not act in ways inconsistent with
compassion or even verbalize your new beliefs, you are being told
directly here that no circumstance should call you to abandon them. 

<sup>20.10</sup> Your new thought system is not tied to beliefs of an
“if this, then that” nature. Look at the examples all around you. People
who live what you call healthy lives succumb to illnesses and accidents
just as do those who live what you call unhealthy lives. “Good” people
have as much calamity befall them as do “bad.” I am not calling you to
just another version of being good or mentally healthy, to exercises in
visualization or positive thinking. I am calling you to live by the
truth and to never deny it. To see no circumstance as cause to abandon
it. Yes, I am providing you with means to help you know how to live by
the truth, but the means are not the end and are never to be confused as
such. Your observance is to remain with cause rather than stray to
effect. 

<sup>20.11</sup> Miracles are not the end, but merely the means, of
living by the truth. Miracles are not meant to be called upon to create
specific outcomes in specific circumstances. They are meant to be lived
by as the truth is meant to be lived by. Not because you desire an
outcome, but because it is who you are and because you realize you can
no longer be, live, or think as other than who you are in truth. This is
how thorough your learning must be. It is a learning that must not
change to fit the circumstances of illusion but be unchanging to fit the
circumstances of the truth. 

<sup>20.12</sup> You can no longer return to the house of illusion, not
even to cause explosions within it. You have stepped out of this house
and are called not to return. To turn your back not on the truth nor on
God or love.  

<sup>20.13</sup> Will those you love still suffer?  Many may. But not
with your help. Will many more, with your help, see an end to suffering?
Many will. Will an end to suffering be what you work toward? No. This is
not your work. This is not about your effort. This is about your
observance.  Your observance of the laws of love. Your observance is to
remain with cause rather than to stray to effect, the manner of living
practiced by those who have birthed the idea that cause and effect are
one in truth. 

<sup>20.14</sup> I thank you for your strong desire to be saviors of the
world and to end her suffering. I thank you for your compassion and for
your desire to be of service to the world. But I call to you from peace
and ask for you to remain in peace with me and let not the suffering of
the world call you from it. When these things of the world threaten to
call you from your peace, you must remind yourself that it is only from
within the Peace of God that your wholeheartedness and our unity is
accomplished. 

<sup>20.15</sup> My dear brothers and sisters in Christ, let nothing
call you to return to the ways of old. They do not work! To minister to
those within the house of illusion is to offer the temporary to the
temporary when I call you to offer the eternal to the eternal. The new
way will work wherever it finds willingness. You cannot call others to
abandon their willingness to live in illusion by joining them there! You
can only call others to a willingness to set illusion aside and to begin
the journey home to unity. You can only call to them from unity if you
are already there! 

<sup>20.16</sup> These calls go out from love to love. It is not the
words of your mouth that will be heard or the language of your mind that
will be responded to. It is the love within your heart that will sound
the call.  And when it is heard, and your brother or sister reaches out
to you, all you need ask for is a little willingness. All you need do is
open the door through which love can enter. 

<sup>20.17</sup> And thus we return to observance, the observance of
love by love.  See not what love would not have you see. Turn from the
dark ways of illusion and shine the light of truth for all to see.
Remain who you are and continue to live by the laws of love in every
circumstance, and you bring love to every circumstance. Be neither
dismayed nor discouraged by those who do not see and have no willingness
to offer.  Just know these aren’t the ones given you to bring to love
and trust that none will remain forever lost to his or her own Self. 

<sup>20.18</sup> You are as pioneers to this new world. Its mere
existence will attract others and each will find the price of admission
is their willingness to leave the old behind. This is a price they must
freely give and it cannot be extorted from them, not from special ones
of your choosing, and not from anyone. Thus you are released from a
burden never meant to rest upon you even if it is one you might have
freely chosen.  Your task is to create the new world and make it
observable, not for you to recruit others to it. 

<sup>20.19</sup> Thus, the circumstance of suffering or illness is not
different but the same as every other circumstance you will encounter.
You will encounter truth or illusion and nothing else for there is
nothing else.  There is but one call for all circumstances, the call to
love from love, the call that welcomes all to live in truth.

