---
treatise: "A Treatise on The Personal Self: The Third Treatise"
chapter: "19"
title: "Treatise 3, Chapter 19: Physical Reality"
---

<sup>19.1</sup> You must not fear the changes that will occur within
your physical form as it begins to be guided by the thought system of
the truth rather than the thought system of illusion. You will fear
these changes less if you realize that all that has come of love will be
kept and that all that has come of fear will fall away. You have no need
to fear that the end of the special relationship will separate you from
your loved ones.  You have no need to fear that the joys you have shared
with others will be no more. You have no more need to fear the loss of
physical joys than you have to fear the loss of mental and spiritual
joys. 

<sup>19.2</sup> For ages man has thought that spiritual joy diminishes
physical joy. While there is no physical joy that is limited to the
physical—no joy felt by the physical form alone—the joy that comes of
things physical can certainly still be experienced and expressed. This
is no call for judgment upon the physical. How could this be true when
the physical is now called upon to serve the greatest learning humankind
has ever known? 

<sup>19.3</sup> Put these fears to rest. 

<sup>19.4</sup> For ages physical reality has been linked to temptations
of the human experience. Let us now dispel this link. The physical form
has been blamed for choices made from lust and greed, hate and fear,
vengeance and retribution. These things have always had as their cause
the thought system of the ego or the bitterness of the heart. As cause
and effect are one, there is no effect to be seen in physical form
without a corresponding cause birthed in the ego thought system or the
bitterness of the heart. 

<sup>19.5</sup> That these feelings can be “acted out” by the body and
in the acting out cause harm to other bodies, is the cause for blame and
fear of the body. So too is it with actions linked with survival needs. 

<sup>19.6</sup> For ages the survival needs of the body have gone
unquestioned and been held paramount. The *will* of the body to survive
has thus been blamed for all actions that have arisen from real and
perceived lack.  Yet the body has no *will* and the survival of the true
Self is not based upon it. 

<sup>19.7</sup> Because the spiritual life has so often been linked with
celibacy I will mention sexual union specifically here to put behind you
any fear that you may have that an end to sexual union may be called
for. While some of you may have less desire for physical joining as you
become more aware of unity, some may have more desire for physical
joining as an expression of that union.  Neither option is reason for
judgment. 

<sup>19.8</sup> There is only one distinction that need be made: what
comes of love and what comes of fear. All expressions of love are of
maximal benefit to everyone. While you may, for a while yet, not see
that all that are not expressions of love are expressions of fear, I
assure you this is the case. Thus any behavior, including sexual
behavior that is not of love, is of fear. All that comes of fear is
nothing.  What this means is that cause and effect are not influenced by
what comes of fear. You may still think that suffering and “bad”
behavior have had great effects but they have not. At times, the love
that is received following suffering, or that may arrive due to the
reason of some affliction, may be seen as lessons learned from suffering
or affliction; but this is no more the case than it was the case in
regards to our discussion of extremes. 

<sup>19.9</sup> There is no longer any *time* to waste on such
illusions. The thought system of the truth sees no value in suffering
and so sees it not in truth. The thought system of the truth is a
thought system that is not split by varying goals and desires. It is a
thought system of unity. It is a thought system of one thought, one
goal. That goal is the original thought that began the experience in
physical form, the thought of expressing the Self in observable form. 

<sup>19.10</sup> Leave all blaming of the body behind and see it not as
the source of temptations of the human experience. The true source of
these temptations has been revealed to lie within the faulty beliefs to
which the body merely responded. The body’s response to the new thought
system will be different in many ways, none of which will lead you to
feel that you have lost anything of value to you.

<sup>19.11</sup> While others still remain tied to the old thought
system, human behavior will still reflect harmful actions that will seem
to arise from bodily temptations. Although you will now represent who
you are in physical form in a new way, you can still see that your
actions of the past represented who you believed yourself to be. Thus
those continuing to express themselves in harmful ways are deeply
entrenched in false beliefs about themselves. Because they are not
expressing who they are, their expressions are meaningless and have no
effect *in truth* but only *in illusion*. To live in truth is to live
without fear of the meaningless acts of those living *in illusion*
because they will be unable to cause effect in the House of Truth. 

<sup>19.12</sup> These lessons could not be taught while blame remained
within your thought system. No victim is to blame for the violence done
to them. No sick person is to blame for the illness within them. But you
must be able to look at and see reality for what it is. Just as we are
telling you that new beliefs and ideas will lead to a new reality, old
beliefs and ideas led to the old reality, a reality that will still
exist for some even after it changes completely for you. 

<sup>19.13</sup> This will seem even more inconsistent with a benevolent
universe than it once did because of the difference between one reality
and the other, a difference that couldn’t be seen until it was
represented in an observable manner, something you will now do. 

<sup>19.14</sup> You would think that this disparity would be divisive
and extremely uncomfortable and even rage-producing for those still
living in illusion. But it will be much more tempting to be divisive,
uncomfortable and rage-producing for those living in the new. Many who
observe the new from the house of illusion will still be able to deny
what they see. Just think of how many saints and miracles you have heard
of in the past without being moved to believe that they mean anything at
all about the nature of who you are. This is why no more time can be
wasted and why so many are being called in the strongest manner it is
possible to call them. It is only when what is observable is so widely
evident that it can no longer be denied that changes of a large scale
will begin to be seen.  

<sup>19.15</sup> You will be tempted to return to the house of illusion
to gather those within and bid them join you in the reality of the
truth. But in this time of Christ, a *new* time, a time without parallel
or comparison, this will not be possible. It has been said from the
beginning that your role will not be to evangelize or to be convincing.
You cannot argue the case of truth in the courtroom of illusion. 

<sup>19.16</sup> While this would seem to leave some without hope, it
will leave no one without choice. It will make the one clear and only
choice evident.  It is a choice to live in truth or in illusion. There
are many ways that can still be found to come to the truth. But *a way*
of getting to the truth will become so attractive that few will be able
to resist.  What will make this choice so attractive will not be martyrs
and saintly souls stricken with every calamity and yet remaining to tell
those who would listen about the glory of God. What will make this
choice so attractive are ordinary people living extraordinary, and
miraculous, and observable lives.

