---
treatise: "A Treatise on The Personal Self: The Third Treatise"
chapter: "22"
title: "Treastise 3, Chapter 22: The True Self in Observable Form"
---

<sup>22.1</sup> Although the entire purpose of these Treatises is to
answer the question of what to do with what you have learned, chances
are that this is still the primary question in your mind and heart.
While you may be beginning to form ideas of what it means to live by the
truth, these ideas may not seem to have much relevance or relationship
to the life you currently live. While you may be happy to learn that you
are not called to evangelize or even to a leadership role, you know that
you are called to something and think that you as yet know not what that
something is. You think that to be asked to simply “live” by the truth
could not possibly be enough. You would like to know in what direction
living by the truth will take you, for surely your life must change. The
very precepts put forth within this Course, precepts that say that the
internal affects the external, seem as evidence that you will no longer
be allowed the “separate” life, or private life that you have lived.

<sup>22.2</sup> Surely there are already those called to represent not
only their true Selves but this Course to the world. If this had not
been the case, you would not be taking this Course. It would not be
available, and it would not be known to you. So even while I have said
that no one is called to leadership and while I have surely meant this
and do not call for leaders to amass followers, I do not mean to
dissuade any of you who feel a call to represent this Course and the
teachings of this Course with your lives and work. Those who feel this
call are surely needed.  And each of you will find the sharing of this
Course to be among the easiest of ways to share what you have learned.
You will almost certainly feel eagerness to share it and joy whenever
and wherever you are able to do so. But some of you will find that you
do no more than mention this Course as the one, or only one of the
teachings that has led you to the truth. 

<sup>22.3</sup> You are a beautiful representation of the truth and
cannot be otherwise. You may bring this beauty to any number of walks of
life, to what you currently do or to something you have always dreamt of
doing.  Wherever you go, whatever you do, the truth will go with you.
You need no uniform nor title nor specific role for this to be the case. 

<sup>22.4</sup> Since your personal self was always meant to represent
the truth of who you are, the seeds of who you are, are planted there,
right within the Self you have always been. There has always been within
you, however, a creative tension between accepting who you are and
becoming who you want to be. This tension will continue if you are
unable to integrate two precepts of this course of learning into your
new reality.  One is the often-repeated injunction to resign as your own
teacher. The other is the ability to cease all acts of comparison.

<sup>22.5</sup> The injunction that you resign as your own teacher
originated in *A Course in Miracles* and was furthered here. Along with
this resignation is the concept of receiving rather than planning. Your
feeling that a specific role is required of you, or that you have a
specific thing to do of which you need to be aware, are functions of the
pattern of the planning process that once so ruled your mind. To be
willing to receive instead of plan is to break the pattern of planning. 

<sup>22.6</sup> Receiving is not an inactive state, nor one familiar to
most of you. While you cannot “work” at being receptive, and while I
also do not ask you to “work” to break the pattern of planning, I do ask
you to let it go and to replace it with observation. 

<sup>22.7</sup> Observation is the active state of reception, a state
not confined to receiving, but a state of giving and receiving as one.
Observation, as I am speaking of it and teaching it, makes you one with
what you observe. Being one with what you observe causes you to know the
proper response. It is in responding properly that you will know what to
do. 

<sup>22.8</sup> Plans will only interfere with your response to what you
are given to observe. The act of observation that you are able to do
with your eyes closed is the observation of what is. This will relate to
the future pattern of creating that we will speak of more in the next
Treatise. 

<sup>22.9</sup> You are impatient now to get on to the next level, the
level of something new, the level that will engage you in something “to
do,” the level that will give an outlet for the excitement that has been
building within you. You are ready to be done with the concerns of the
personal self, and your attention has begun to wander from this topic
even as it is being concluded. 

<sup>22.10</sup> This has been necessary so that the realization will
come to you that you are ready to leave the personal self and the
concerns of the personal self behind.  You have needed to become bored
with what has been, tired of the way things were, uninterested in
matters of a personal nature. This very readiness is what I now call
your attention to as I complete this Treatise with lessons concerning
observation of your new Self. 

<sup>22.11</sup> The ability to cease all acts of comparison will arise
out of this observation of your new Self, for you cannot observe your
new Self without observing the truth that has always existed. The truth
that has always existed is our oneness, and what you will observe about
your new Self you will observe about all. We will be one body, One Self.
No comparison will be possible. You will realize that differences but
lie in expression and representation of the truth, never in the truth
itself. 

<sup>22.12</sup> I return you now to what I spoke of earlier as creative
tension, the tension that exists between accepting what is and desiring
what will be. Linking the words creative and tension is caused by the
dualistic world in which you have lived, a world wherein a lag time
exists between what is and what will be. You may have, upon reading
those words, thought that this creative tension would not necessarily be
a good thing to give up. You do not know how to reach beyond what was
for what will be without this tension. You do not yet believe in what
is. 

<sup>22.13</sup> Observation, both of yourself and of what you desire,
is an act that takes place in the here and now that is and brings what
is into existence. You believe that what does not appear to exist with
you in the here and now is not, and place it in a separate category, a
category that only exists in the dualistic world of illusion where here
and now is separate from what will be. In the new world, the world where
truth reigns, there is no cause for tension for there is no world of
illusion where what is, is separate from what will be.  

<sup>22.14</sup> Observation of what you desire, what we have referred
to as “closed eyes” observation, can be likened to prayer and thus to
the miracle. This is the very miracle that closes the door of duality,
and seals out the world where what *is*, is separated from what *will
be* by your effort and the time that it will take you to, through your
effort, create the desired outcome.  Observation of what you desire is
observation of what *is*, for your desire is of God and what you desire
now, contrary to what you would have desired in the early stages of this
Course, is the Will of God.  What you desire now is the Will of God
because it is your true desire, your will and God’s joined as one. 

<sup>22.15</sup> Thus the creative tension can be taken from the
creative act of observation without a loss of any kind.  The creative
tension existed not only as a product of the duality of time, but also
as a product of distrust. It was a tension that existed between desire
and accomplishment, the tension that told you that you might be able to
achieve what you desire but that you also might not.  Realize that this
game of chance is a pattern of the old thought system that needs to be
replaced by certainty. If you have enjoyed the game of chance, play a
real game and have fun doing it. Do not bring this attitude into your
new thought system or your new life. If you are tired of the old, be
willing to be done with the old. 

<sup>22.16</sup> And so we conclude with this note of impatience with
the old and the observation, the final observation, of the personal
self. You have created your personal self, and only you can look upon
this personal self with the vision of creation, creating the personal
self anew, seeing within it all that will serve the new, and only what
will serve the new. 

<sup>22.17</sup> Observe the personal self with one last act of love and
devotion, and in so doing transform the personal self into a
representation of the truth. Realize that what we have called “closed
eyes” observation is really the observation of a Self beyond the
personal self. To call forth observance is to call forth the sight of
your true Self. To call forth the sight of your true Self is to call
your true Self into observable form. Calling the true Self forth into
observable form is the end of the old and the beginning of the new. 

<sup>22.18</sup> Embrace the new as the new embraces you. The new is but
the truth that has always existed. Go forth and live the truth with
impatience only for the truth. Hold this impatience to your Self as
eagerness for the final lessons, lessons on creation of the new.

