---
treatise: "A Treatise on The Personal Self: The Third Treatise"
chapter: "6"
title: "Treatise 3, Chapter 6: The Desire for Reward"
---

<sup>6.1</sup> Can you give up your desire for reward? To give up your
desire for reward is to give up a childish desire that has become like
unto a plague among you. While many of you see it not, everything you do
is based upon desire for reward. This is your desire to be given to in
return for what you give. This stems from your idea of yourself as a
“child” of God, and a notion that would seem to suggest that the child
is less than the parent. Although you see yourself as the child of your
mother and father, this notion of yourself as child has not made you
cling to a childish image of yourself as less than what your parents
are. While you may still desire recognition and affirmation from them,
this is not the same as the “rewards” you seek—some of you from God,
some from life, some from fate. No matter who it is you think is in
charge of rewarding you, the attitude that causes you to desire reward
is what must be done without. 

<sup>6.2</sup> This may seem a step back from the lofty heights we have
just traveled, discussing the reign of God and the meaning of life and
death.  But this is one of the key ideas that will keep you from
yourself and has much to do with your former notions of God and your own
self. It is an idea that has been transferred to all of life, much as
the idea of an unlovable self was transferred into all areas of life
without your realization. 

<sup>6.3</sup> Reward is intricately tied to your notions of being good,
performing deeds of merit, and taking care of, or surviving, the many
details that seem to make it possible for you to live within your world.
The idea of reward transfers to ideas related to comparison as well, as
lack of reward in one instance and reward given in another, is the cause
of much of the bitterness that exists within your hearts. 

<sup>6.4</sup> While many of you who have read this far and learned this
much may not be those whose bitterness is mighty and held tightly to
themselves, bitterness must still be discussed. While bitterness
remains, vengeance will remain. You have been shown that God is not a
God of vengeance but that you are still in the process of learning that
your Self is not vengeful. The ego has given you many reasons to be
distrustful of your Self, beginning with the idea of your abandonment
here. Since the ego is a chosen self and a learned self, there has
always been just enough room within the ego’s thought system to keep
within you the idea of a self the ego is not. Thus has the ego had a
self to blame for everything, including your very existence. This blame
is as old as time itself and the cause of bitterness being able to
exist, even within your hearts. 

<sup>6.5</sup> While the untrue cannot exist with the true, what I am
calling here *bitterness* is all that you have forced, through sheer
strength of will, to pierce the holiness of your hearts.  Bitterness and
the idea of vengeance go hand-in-hand. This is the idea of “an eye for
an eye” or the exact opposite of the idea of “turning the other cheek.”
While this may seem like the very idea of evil which I have denied the
existence of, it is not evil but bitterness. You may believe that
bitterness is just another word, another label for the evil you have
always been convinced existed in the hearts of some, but even being that
it is just another word, it is one chosen to introduce an idea of such
fallacy that it rivals only the ego in its destructive potential.
Bitterness is to your heart what the ego has been to your mind. It is
the one false idea that has entered this holiest of places, this abode
of Christ, this bridge between the human and the divine. It exists not
in some but in all, as the ego has existed not in some but in all. Like
the ego, it has not caused you to be unlovable or unrecognizable. But it
has become, like the ego, so much a part of your reality that it must,
like the ego, be consciously left behind.

<sup>6.6</sup> Bitterness, as the word implies, is something taken into
the self, much as the bitter herbs of scripture illustrated. Many rites
and rituals exist for the purification of the unclean but I assure you
that you are not unclean and that none can cleanse bitterness from the
heart without your choice. The time of tenderness began your release of
bitterness and made you ready for this choice. Choose now to leave your
desire for reward, as well as all of your reasons for bitterness, and
bitterness itself behind. Bring bitterness no longer to the dwelling
place of Christ and we will seal the place of its entrance with the
sweetness of love so that bitterness will be no more.

