---
treatise: "A Treatise on The Personal Self: The Third Treatise"
chapter: "11"
title: "Treatise 3, Chapter 11: The Temptations of the Human Experience"
---

<sup>11.1</sup> Consciousness is a state of awareness. The statement “I
am” is a statement of awareness. It has been seen as a statement of
awareness of the self. Those existing within the house of illusion are
aware of the self but are unaware that the self of illusion, the self
that exists in illusion, is an illusionary self. This could be further
stated as those who exist in the house of illusion are aware of the
personal self alone and believe the personal self to be who they are.
Further, they believe the personal self to be the truth of the
statement, “I am.” 

<sup>11.2</sup> Those existing within the House of Truth also feel an
awareness of Self.  Without necessarily being able to put it into words,
they no longer feel the statement of “I am” as a statement of the
personal self or the self alone. For those existing in the House of
Truth, “I am” has become something larger, an all-encompassing
recognition of the unity of all things with which the Self coexists in
truth and peace and love.

<sup>11.3</sup> These words, *truth* and *peace* and *love*, are
interchangeable in the *House of Truth* as their meaning there is the
same. These words, like the words House of Truth, represent an awareness
of a new reality, a new dwelling place. 

<sup>11.4</sup> The word *house* as used in the *House of Truth* does
not represent a structure but a dwelling place. The word *house* as used
in the *house of illusion* does represent a structure. The house of
illusion is a construction meant to shield the personal self from all
that it would fear. The House of Truth is the dwelling place of those
who no longer live in fear and thus have no need for a structure of
seeming protection. 

<sup>11.5</sup> The house of illusion is the stage on which the drama of
the human experience has been acted out. 

<sup>11.6</sup> During the time I spent on earth I did not dwell in the
house of illusion but in the House of Truth. What this means is that I
was aware of the truth and lived by the truth. I was aware of the Peace
of God and lived within the Peace of God. I was aware of the Love of God
and the Love of God lived within me.

<sup>11.7</sup> This is what you are now called to do:<br/>*Be aware
that the love of God lives within you.<br/>Live within the peace of
God.<br/>Live by the truth.*

<sup>11.8</sup> This could be restated as you *are* love, you live *in*
peace, you live *by* or in accord with the truth. 

<sup>11.9</sup> I have called the Kingdom of God the House of Truth
rather than the House of Peace for a reason. What you are learning is no
longer that the Kingdom of God or the House of Truth exists, but how to
live within it.  The question of how to live within it is best addressed
by concentrating on living according to the truth.

<sup>11.10</sup> While a lack of judgment has been stressed many times,
and we have adhered to the precept of not judging by denying any right
or wrong, the difference between truth and illusion can no longer be
denied. To realize the difference between truth and illusion is not to
call one right and the other wrong but to simply recognize what they
are. This is an important distinction that must be kept in mind as we
proceed so that you are not tempted to judge those living in illusion or
their reality.  Their reality does not exist. Believing in the reality
of illusion will never make it the truth. 

<sup>11.11</sup> Thus we begin to address the temptations of the human
experience.  Two are spoken of in tandem here: The temptation to judge
and the temptation to accept the existence of a reality other than the
truth. 

<sup>11.12</sup> If I can tell you in truth that you are no different
than I am, then you must see that you cannot begin to think of yourself
as different than your brothers and sisters. *All* exist in the House of
Truth. The house of illusion exists within the House of Truth *because*
it is where your brothers and sisters think they are. The house of
illusion is not a *hell* to which anyone has been banished. It can at
times be a chosen hell, just as it can at times be a chosen heaven.
Choice and the awareness of the power of choice that exists within is
all that differentiates one from the other. 

<sup>11.13</sup> You must not see your brothers and sisters within the
house of illusion but must see them where they truly are—within the
House of Truth. As soon as you would “see” the house of illusion, you
would make it real, and with its reality judgment would be upon you—not
any judgment of God, but judgment of your own mind. 

<sup>11.14</sup> I remind you here that you are not being asked to *see*
anything that is not the truth. This is why the word *see* is
consciously used here and why we now refrain from use of the word
*perceive*. Perception is gone as soon as you truly see. 

<sup>11.15</sup> You will, of course, continue to be aware that very few
realize that they exist in the House of Truth. You will, in truth, for
quite some time, be striving to remain aware even that you have changed
dwelling places. There is a reason for this time of varying degrees of
awareness. As the old continues to help you to learn lessons of the new
you will be seeing how the lessons of the illusion can be useful in a
new way to your brothers and sisters as well. Never forget that what was
made for your use can be used in a new way and to produce a new outcome.
Do not be afraid to use anything available within the house of illusion
to promote the recognition of truth. Do not be afraid of the house of
illusion at all.  What illusion can frighten those who know the truth? 

<sup>11.16</sup> This first lesson on the temptation of the human
experience comes in truth as a warning against righteousness. It comes
to remind you, as you replace the thought system of illusion with the
thought system of the truth, that having remembered the truth of who you
are, you are called to forget the personal self who would find this
cause for righteousness.  You are not right and others wrong. This
temptation will not long be with you for once the old thought system is
thoroughly translated to the new, such ideas as right and wrong will be
no more. It is only for this transitional phase, that this and all such
reminders regarding the temptations of the human experience are
necessary.

