---
treatise: "A Treatise on The Personal Self: The Third Treatise"
chapter: "10"
title: "Treatise 3, Chapter 10: An Exercise in Forgetting"
---

<sup>10.1</sup> *A Course of Love* talked much of remembering. Now we
must talk about forgetting. While nothing need be given up to enter the
House of Truth, or to encounter the truth, you must realize that while
meaninglessness exists within your mind, you will be working still to
replace it with meaning rather than allowing the meaning that exists in
everything to be remembered or known. Thus are more practical lessons
needed in regard to the life of the body that you now will let serve our
cause of creating heaven on earth. 

<sup>10.2</sup> The first lesson is offered as an exercise in
forgetting. As often as is possible within your daily life, I ask you to
forget as much of what you have learned as you are able. 

<sup>10.3</sup> The first thing I ask you to forget is your need to find
a place where blame can be placed. You who have been waiting to get to
the “hard part” of this Course may find it here. The idea of blame is
incongruous with the idea of a benevolent Creator and a benevolent
creation and as such is the only blasphemy. To blame yourself is as
senseless as blaming others and your inclination to place blame upon
yourself must be given up as well.  When it is said that you are the
cause it is not meant that you are to blame for anything. Although many
a child has been blamed for his or her failure to learn, blame of
yourself is as uncalled for as is blaming a child for lessons yet to be
learned. 

<sup>10.4</sup> Taking away the idea of placing blame will change your
thought processes beyond your wildest imagining.  You will be surprised
at how many times you recognize blame where before you saw it not, just
as in the beginning you did not recognize all that you had feared. But
just as you have, from recognizing what it is you fear, been able to
bring those concerns to love, you can now do so with blame. All you need
do is catch yourself in the act of placing blame and say to yourself, “I
was placing blame again and I choose to do so no longer.” You need not
spend any more time with blame than this and I offer you no word or
sentiment to replace it. I ask you simply to take the thought of it from
your mind as quickly as it enters. 

<sup>10.5</sup> You would find this easier if a replacement were
offered, for ridding your mind of blame will leave an empty space you
will long to fill. This act of consciously choosing not to place blame
will short-circuit the many thoughts that you would attach to this idea,
thoughts that have formed a chain-reaction of situations and events,
feelings and behaviors that you had no realization were birthed from the
idea of blame. Although I offer it not as a replacement, what you will
find will come in the place of blame is an idea of acceptance of what
*is*, an idea that is needed now.

<sup>10.6</sup> Acceptance of what is, is acceptance that whatever is
happening in the present moment is a gift and a lesson. What comes as a
lesson may not seem like a gift, but all lessons are gifts. While some
of these lessons may come in forms that make them seem like lessons of
old, they will not be repeats of lessons that have come before. They
will not be lessons that you find difficult or distressing if you accept
them as lessons and realize that all lessons are gifts. What you have
struggled to learn in the past you have struggled with only because you
did not realize the nature of the situation as a lesson or recognize
that all lessons are gifts. 

<sup>10.7</sup> This relates to our exercise on forgetting for you must
forget the ways in which you have formerly reacted to every situation.
Not one situation coming to you now will be a repeat of the past. How
can it be when the past was lived in the house of illusion and the
present is lived in the House of Truth? Being cognizant of this is the
only way that the simultaneous learning and unlearning that was spoken
of earlier will be able to be realized. You have passed through your
time of unlearning what the past but seemed to teach you. Now, while
life may seem much unchanged in its outward appearance, it is up to you
to become aware of the total change that has, in truth, taken place. 

<sup>10.8</sup> Along with forgetting there is another practice that
will help you to become aware of this change. While much the same as
forgetting it will seem to have a different process in practice. This is
the practice of ceasing to listen to the voice of the ego. While the ego
is gone, many of its messages remain within your thoughts, like echoes
of a former time. These thoughts are remembered messages and so must,
like all the rest, be forgotten. The process of forgetting these thought
patterns will be only slightly different from forgetting your former
reactions to people and situations and much like forgetting to place
blame. 

<sup>10.9</sup> The first step in being able to forget such thoughts is
in recognizing them as separate and distinct from the thoughts of your
right mind or Christ-mind. This will be easy because the thoughts of the
ego-mind were always harsh with you or with others. The Christ-mind and
the thoughts that come from the voice of the Christ-mind will be gentle.
The thoughts of the ego-mind will come as disguises to certainty. Given
just a little practice, these disguises will be easily seen through and
the uncertainty behind them revealed. Thoughts of the Christ-mind will
hold a certainty that cannot be disguised. Remember that all doubt is
doubt about yourself and that you are no longer called to doubt
yourself. Your Self is now your Christ-Self. 

<sup>10.10</sup> You will feel for a while as if constant certainty is
impossible.  This feeling will remain only as long as you remember your
past uncertainty. Uncertainty, like all the rest of the ego’s thought
system, was learned. Your true Self has no cause for uncertainty. Thus
you are called, as well, to forget the uncertainty of the past. 

<sup>10.11</sup> While these may seem like remedial lessons, they are
not. You are no longer called to a time of uncertainty to learn through
contrast the lessons of certainty. Realize that this is how you have
learned *in the past* and that all that is from the past is what you are
being called to forget. Thus when uncertainty arises, you need but
remind yourself that the time for uncertainty is past.  Uncertainty will
not now come to teach you lessons you have already learned but will only
visit you as an echo from the past. It is a habit, a pattern of the old
thought system.  All you must do is not listen to it. Its voice will not
be gentle or full of love. Its voice will hold the unmistakable edge of
fear. 

<sup>10.12</sup> Remember that, while gentle, these are and will, be
*practical* lessons that simply come to show you a new way of living,
the way of living in the House of Truth. You will not need to learn a
foreign *language* to dwell in this new house, but you will need to
learn what will at first seem to you a foreign *thought system*. This
thought system recognizes no fear or judgment, no uncertainty or doubt,
no contrast and no division. It is the thought system of unity. It is
your true thought system and will be easily remembered once you begin to
let it automatically replace the old.

<sup>10.13</sup> Think of this, for a moment, as you would a learned
language. If you learned Spanish as a child and then learned and spoke
English for many years, you might believe your Spanish to be forgotten.
However, if you were to return to a dwelling where those within it spoke
only Spanish, soon your knowledge of Spanish would return. For a short
while you would have two languages constantly running through your mind
and you would be translating one into the other. But eventually, if this
situation went on for many years, you might think you had forgotten your
ability to understand English. 

<sup>10.14</sup> What we are doing now is much like translating the
learned thought system of the ego into the thought system of the
Christ-Self that you but think you have forgotten. As you dwell in the
House of Truth, if you do not resist unlearning the ego thought system,
the thought system of your true Self will quite simply return to your
memory. You will soon forget the thought system of the ego-self even
though, when encountering those who still use that thought system, you
will be able to communicate with them. Yet the ease with which you
communicate with them will diminish over time. You will find yourself
continuously teaching the *language*, if you will, of the new thought
system, for you will have no desire to communicate with anything less. 

<sup>10.15</sup> You will find that your new *language* will gather
people to you in much the way people will gravitate toward beautiful
music. Many will be eager to learn what you have remembered because they
will realize that the memory of this *language* exists within them as
well. It will come naturally to you to welcome these back to the common
*language* of the mind and heart joined in unity. You will desire more
than anything for everyone you encounter to share this remembered
language.  Some, however, will be resistant. 

<sup>10.16</sup> This is why we have called these lessons in forgetting
practical lessons for the life of the body. They are lessons that will
soon be translated in another way. These lessons that will enter your
mind and heart will, of necessity, need to be translated into the
language of the body as well. While your human form remains, you will be
dwelling among those in human form. While the house of illusion still
exists, you will continue to encounter those who exist within it. While
you continue to encounter those who exist in the house of illusion you
will continue to encounter temptations of the human experience. These
are what we will now address.

