---
treatise: "A Treatise on The Personal Self: The Third Treatise"
chapter: "17"
title: "Treatise 3, Chapter 17: A Mistake in Learning"
---

<sup>17.1</sup> Why would you ever have chosen to obscure the truth? As
we have already shown, to have chosen to express the Self in physical
form was a choice consistent with the laws of love. There was no need
for the Self to be separate in order for this to be so, but there was a
need for the Self to have an observable form and to exist in
relationship with others with observable forms. This was simply so that
expressions of love could be created and observed within the realm of
physicality. 

<sup>17.2</sup> The biblical story of Adam and Eve that has them eating
from the tree of knowledge was an illustration of the effects of this
observation and the judgment that sprang from it. The Self “fell” from
unity through this judgment of what it observed as being other than
itself, through this beginning of making distinctions between the Self
and all other things in creation that existed with the Self. This is why
the story of creation includes the naming of creatures. It was the
beginning of perception and of the idea that what was observable was
“other than” he who did the observing. Now your science is proving to
you the relationship between the observer and the observed, the effect
that one cannot help but have upon the other. Science still has a long
way to go in determining, through its processes, what this says about
the nature of humankind but it is closer every day to understanding the
unity and interconnectedness of all things. 

<sup>17.3</sup> As soon as spirit took on form, man began to exist in
time because there became a need for a beginning and an ending to the
chosen experience. Thus each self of form is born *into* time and each
self of form dies *out* of time. Both birth and death have always
existed as choices, as beginnings and endings to the finite experience
of time. It is the nature of what is finite to begin and end.  Birth and
death are all you have seen as true new beginnings. 

<sup>17.4</sup> As has been said before, time is a measurement of the
“time” it takes for learning to occur. A *new* experience was chosen—the
experience of existing within the realm of physicality. As such, it was
as much a new beginning as the new beginning you are now called to. It
required the learning of a new thought system, the thought system of the
physical, a thought system that was not needed before there was physical
form. The creation story of Adam and Eve, as well as many other creation
stories, but tell of a “mistake” in the learning of a thought system of
physicality, a mistake that became a building block for all that came
after it. 

<sup>17.5</sup> That mistake was seeing God as “other than” and separate
from the Self. While it was important to the desired experience to learn
the lessons of what was observable within the physical realm, to have
begun to forget the unobservable began a process of unlearning or
forgetting of the truth that has led, through the learning of untruth in
the mechanism of time, to the world in which you now exist. It may seem
ridiculous to say that the untrue can be learned, but this is exactly
what has been learned during the time of your experience in physical
form. Since your true Self could not learn the untrue, a new self, which
we have called the ego-self, was made.  Since the ego-self cannot learn
the true, your true Self had to be appealed to for this learning to take
place. 

<sup>17.6</sup> The Holy Spirit was called upon to return this
remembrance to minds and hearts. But again let me remind you that the
Holy Spirit is not other than who you are but an aspect of who you are
and Who God Is.  Let me remind you also that names, such as *Holy
Spirit*, are but word symbols that represent what is. So think now of
whatever stories you know of the Holy Spirit, stories that symbolize
what is. In these stories, the Holy Spirit is always called upon to
return the true Self to the self of illusion. A Holy Spirit is called to
return to your mind and heart. 

<sup>17.7</sup> You were told in “A Treatise on the Art of Thought” that
the time of the Holy Spirit has ended and the time of the second coming
of Christ is here. The name of Christ was associated with my name, the
name Jesus, because I lived as a man with a Holy Spirit in my mind and
heart and as such represented the truth. Many others by many other names
have represented the truth and in so doing dispelled illusion within
themselves and those who followed their teachings and example. This has
occurred within the time of the Holy Spirit. 

<sup>17.8</sup> The Holy Spirit, unlike God the Creator, has known the
existence of the illusion and the thought system of the ego-self and
been able to communicate within that illusion. Without this means of
communication with the ego-self the ability to learn the truth could not
have returned to you. The “time” of the Holy Spirit has now ended
because the time of illusion is now called to an end. What is finite has
an end point and this is that end point for the time of illusion. The
return of Christ, or *your* ability and willingness to live as your true
Self, to live in the House of Truth rather than the house of illusion,
is what will end the time of illusion. Just as the truth is the truth
and illusion is illusion; just as these things are what they are without
judgment; so is the beginning the beginning and the end the end. The
beginning we speak of here is the same as the end we speak of here. The
*time* of the Holy Spirit, or the time in which communication was needed
between the illusion and the truth, *must* end in order for the truth to
become the one reality.

