---
treatise: "A Treatise on The Personal Self: The Third Treatise"
chapter: "3"
title: "Treatise 3, Chapter 3: The True Self"
---

<sup>3.1</sup> Your personal self is dear to you and dear to me as well.
I have always loved you because I have always recognized you. What
cannot be recognized or known cannot be loved. While your ego has not
been loveable, you have always been. Here is where you need realize that
the personal self that is dear to you is not your ego-self and never has
been. 

<sup>3.2</sup> All of your personal characteristics are nothing more
than a persona that has served the ego faithfully. All of your traits
have been chosen either in accordance with the ego’s desires or in
opposition to them.  Whether they be in accord or in opposition, their
source has still been the ego. These traits, whether you see them as
good or bad or somewhere in between are what you have seen as making you
loveable or unlovable.  Yet you have also often made them challenges to
love, saying in effect to those who love you, “Love me in spite of these
traits that are not loveable and then I will know your love is true.”
You make this same statement to yourself as well, seemingly called to
continuously challenge your own lovability. 

<sup>3.3</sup> As much as you fear disappointment for yourself and let
this fear keep you from much you would desire, you fear as much or more
your ability to disappoint others or to “let them down.” Some of you
carefully constructed your lives to leave as little room as possible for
disappointment to affect it or others you hold dear. Some of you have
seemed to do the opposite, despite your best intentions calling
disappointment to yourself and being constantly under the pall of having
disappointed others. Still others have always found their lives to be
beyond their efforts at control and long ago gave up trying.  Most of
you fall somewhere in between, living a life full of good intentions and
effort and being surprised neither by what seems to work nor what seems
to fail. 

<sup>3.4</sup> It is yourself, who, more often than not, you blamed for
all your misfortune. You would have liked to be strong and capable and
hated your own weakness. You would have liked to be even-tempered and
hated the moods that seemed to come over you without cause. You did not
understand when illness or depression stood in the way of your desires
or the plans of others and let such circumstances fill you with
self-loathing. 

<sup>3.5</sup> You thus created a society that reflected this hatred of
the self and that functioned on finding blame for every misfortune. Your
illnesses became the result of behaviors ranging from smoking to too
little exercise. Your accidents caused lawsuits where blame could be
rightly placed. Your depression was blamed on the past. Even your
successes were often claimed to be at the expense of another or to have
come in spite of failings most severe. While society would seem to have
done so much to cause your unhappiness, and while you have in turn
blamed it as much as it blamed you, you never blamed anything quite as
much as you blamed yourself. 

<sup>3.6</sup> This is the vengeful self we eliminate now. You have, in
truth, replaced judgment with forgiveness, but you have not yet fully
forgiven yourself. This statement may sound incongruous, for how could
you have replaced judgment with forgiveness and not forgiven yourself?
What this means is that you have replaced judgment with forgiveness as a
belief.  You have put this belief into practice in each instance where
you have seen it to be needed. What this means is that you continue to
fail to recognize your need to replace judgment with forgiveness when it
comes to yourself. You have not yet realized how much you still consider
unlovable about yourself. This does not mean that you are not loveable,
only that you have not yet fully recognized your true Self. Until you
fully recognize your Self, you cannot fully love yourself. Until you
fully love, you do not love in truth. 

<sup>3.7</sup> Both God and Love are found in relationship where the
truth becomes known to you. When the truth becomes known to you, you
know God for you know love. Beliefs, and especially the changed beliefs
we have worked together to integrate into your thought system, are only
a first step, a step toward holy relationship. These new beliefs of your
new thought system must be wholehearted. They cannot be beliefs that
exist only in your mind, a new philosophy to be applied to life. They
must exist in your heart. And how can they exist in the heart of an
unlovable self? 

<sup>3.8</sup> You cannot think your way to the new life that calls to
you. You can only get there by being who you are in truth. 

<sup>3.9</sup> I have always loved you for I have always recognized you.
While your recognition of your Self has come a long way through your
learning of this Course, your self is still seen as a stumbling block.
You might think that were you able to live in some ideal community, away
from all that has brought you to where you now are, you might be able to
put the beliefs of this Course into practice.  If not quite this
drastic, your thoughts might tell you that if you were in another job,
devoid of certain familial responsibilities, or the need to provide for
financial obligations, you would be much better suited to putting these
beliefs into practice. Or you might look at your behaviors, your habits,
your general personality, and simply declare yourself unsuitable for
further learning. Whether you think such thoughts consciously or not,
there is a part of you that still believes you are not good enough to be
the “good” self you believe this Course calls you to be. Most of you
have now believed you are “good enough” for days or hours or moments,
but something always and eventually calls you back to the idea that you
are not good enough or that you do not want to put the effort into being
good enough. Like a person who believes she has a weight problem and
knows a diet would be “good” for her, the diet is often rejected because
failure is deemed a certainty. While you continue to see the call of
this Course as a call to goodness, you will surely fail. 

<sup>3.10</sup> The Self that I recognize as You, is not other than who
you are, but who you are. All that was ever other than who you are was
the ego.  The ego is gone. The ego was simply your idea of who you were.
This idea was a complex set of judgments, of good and bad, right and
wrong, worthy and unworthy, a list as endless as it was worthless.
Realize now the worthlessness of this idea and let it go.

