---
treatise: "A Treatise on The Personal Self: The Third Treatise"
chapter: "15"
title: "Treatise 3, Chapter 15: The New Beginning"
---

<sup>15.1</sup> Some of you have had more experience with new beginnings
than others. For most mature adults, some form of new beginning has
taken place or been offered. Often, those within the relationship of
marriage have had occasion to choose to forgive the past and begin again
to build a new relationship. Others, in a similar relationship, might
have chosen to let the past go and enter into new relationships. Parents
have welcomed home errant children to give them the chance to begin
again. At all stages of life new friendships are formed and the
relationship with each new friend provides for a new beginning. Some
begin anew through changes in locale and employment. Each new school
year of the young provides a fresh start. Deaths of loved ones and the
births of new family members form new configurations in a life. Nature
begins anew each spring. 

<sup>15.2</sup> What hampers new beginnings of all kinds within the
human experience are ideas that things cannot be different than they
once were. The only true departure from this idea has concerned the
occasions of birth and death. This is something we will return to, but
first let us look at other types of new beginnings and all that would
hamper them from taking place. 

<sup>15.3</sup> New beginnings do not occur outside of relationship. The
idea of special relationship is one that hampers new beginnings. Special
relations of all types are based upon expectation—expectations of
certain behavior—and expectations of continued special treatment within
the relationship. Even, and sometimes especially, what is considered
poor behavior can come to be an expectation difficult to deviate from
within the special relationship.  But whether the expectation is of
special treatment or poor behavior matters not. It is the expectation of
a “known” set of criteria concerning the relationship, a set of criteria
based upon the past that is most often what prevents new beginnings from
truly being new.

<sup>15.4</sup> Often new beginnings are offered or considered “in spite
of” circumstances of the past that would seem to make them foolish.
There is always some “thing” that is expected to change. This idea is
countered internally, however, by the idea that at some basic level,
human beings do not change. You cannot imagine those with whom you are
in relationship being other than who they are. This is consistent with
the truth. Yet who anyone is, is not contingent upon whom they have
represented themselves to be in the past. 

<sup>15.5</sup> When attempting to give oneself or another a new
beginning, you often act “as if” you believe a new beginning is
possible, even while awaiting the lapse that will surely prove to you
that the new beginning is but an act and that nothing has really
changed. A student who failed to learn the prior year, while eager and
confident in being able to succeed in the current year, will continue to
be plagued by memories of failure. The alcoholic can approach each day
with faith while keeping fresh memories of past abuse or humiliation in
the hopes that they will discourage a repeat of the old behavior. The
loved one of an alcoholic can similarly approach each day with faith
even while suspiciously looking for signs that faith is unwarranted. The
criminal is not expected to be rehabilitated despite the efforts of the
system and the hopes of their loved ones.

<sup>15.6</sup> Everyone believes they carry the baggage of the past,
not only their own but that of all the special relationships in which
they have been involved. To have a special relationship with someone who
has failed at offered new beginnings becomes a failure for all involved.
Each sets their own criteria for success or failure and their own timing
for the accomplishment of the same. Some would see six months of change
as the basis for trust in the new. For others six years would not be
enough.

<sup>15.7</sup> You must now birth the idea that human beings do indeed
change.  While you have known instinctively that there is a core, a
center to each that is unchangeable, you must now give up the idea that
this core or center has been represented by the past. You must forget
the idea that the future cannot be different than the past. 

<sup>15.8</sup> With the death of the ego, special relationships too
have breathed their last. As I said before, these will seem to be
remedial lessons.  What they are, in truth, are aids to help you birth
the new ideas that will break the patterns of old. 

<sup>15.9</sup> The new beginning you are called to now is a new
beginning that, like all others that you have offered or attempted, will
take place in relationship. The difference is that this new beginning
will take place in holy, rather than special, relationship. 

<sup>15.10</sup> The holy relationship has been accomplished by the
joining of the mind and heart in unity. The holy relationship is with
the Self, the Self that abides in unity with all within the House of
Truth. This relationship makes the Self one with all and so brings the
holiness of the Self to all.

<sup>15.11</sup> There are no impediments to this new beginning save for
the finalizing of the translation of the thought system of the ego to
the thought system of the truth. As we have said before, it is
impossible to learn the new with the thought system of the old. It is
impossible to learn the truth through the same methods that have been
used in the past to learn illusion. This Course teaches that love cannot
be learned. I have said here that love, peace, and truth are
interchangeable ideas within the new thought system. Thus, truth, like
love, is not something that you can learn. The Good News is that you
have no need to learn the truth. The truth exists within you and you are
now aware of its reality.

<sup>15.12</sup> How then, do you access and live within this new
reality, this new beginning? Through living by the truth. 

<sup>15.13</sup> These Treatises are no longer concerned with coursework
as the work of this Course has been accomplished in you. These Treatises
are simply concerned with assisting you to live what you have learned.
Learning was needed in order to return you to your Self. Despite
whatever method you feel you used to learn what you have learned, what
this Course did was bypass the way of learning of the ego and call upon
the Christ in you to learn anew. That learning put an end to the old.
Living what you have learned will usher in the new. 

<sup>15.14</sup> These examples of your former ideas about new
beginnings have simply been used to demonstrate why you cannot approach
this new beginning as you have those of the past. What will assist you
most, as the translation of the old thought system for the new
continues, are the beliefs that you adopted with the assistance of “A
Treatise on Unity”: 

<sup>15.15</sup> *You are accomplished.<br/>Giving and receiving are one
in truth.<br/>There is no loss but only gain within the laws of
love.<br/>Special relationships have been replaced by holy
relationship.* 

<sup>15.16</sup> What we are adding now to these beliefs is the idea
that these beliefs can be represented in form. These beliefs can, with
the help of the new thought system, change the very nature of the self
described by the words *human being*. This calls for still more
forgetting as you must consciously let go of all your ideas of the
limitations inherent in your concept of what it means to be a human
being.

<sup>15.17</sup> While you would not be other than who you are, who you
are is not limited to the concept of human being nor to the laws of man.
If you continue to act as if you are still the same being that you have
represented yourself to be in the past, you will not be living by the
truth but by illusion. 

<sup>15.18</sup> Illusion is the “truth” by which you have lived. The
total replacement of illusion with the truth is what the new thought
system will accomplish. Obviously, this replacement must be total. The
means for making this total replacement are in your hands but you are
hardly empty-handed. The truth goes with you as do the love and peace of
God.

