---
treatise: "A Treatise On The New: The Fourth Treatise"
chapter: "10"
title: "Treatise 4, Chapter 10: Creating Anew"
---

10.1 This Course has led you through resigning as your own teacher, to
becoming a true student, and to now leading you beyond the time of being
a student to the realization of your accomplishment. You were once
comfortable being your own teacher. You willingly gave up this role and
became comfortable in the true role of learner. You are now asked to be
willing to give up the role of learner and to believe that you will
become comfortable and more in your new role as the accomplished.

10.2 This is hard for you to imagine because as you consider your
willingness to give up learning you will meet resistance and realize,
for perhaps the first time, that learning is what your entire life has
been about.  You cannot imagine how you will come to know anything new,
or be anything beyond that which you now are, without learning. Your
thoughts might stray to ideas about experiencing, rather than studying,
and yet you will quickly see that you merely think of experience as
learning through a different means than studying. 

10.3 As you have advanced along your self-centered path of learning, you
have come to see everything in your life as exactly what it has beenâ€”a
means of learning.  You have encountered problems and wondered what
lessons they have come to teach you. You have encountered illness and
wondered what learning the illness has come to bring you. You have
learned anew from your past.  Learned from your dreams. Learned from art
and music. In all of these things you have viewed yourself as the
learner. You may not have *studied* your problems, illness, your past,
your dreams, or art and music as you *studied* the lessons that kept you
focused on your Self, but you did, in a sense, study every aspect of
your life for the lessons contained therein. So how, you might ask, do
you quit now, doing what you have so long done? 

10.4 In keeping with your new self-centered focus on what life has had
to teach you, you have also seen your relationships as teachers.  It is
here that you can begin to learn to let go of learning because it is
here that learning has been least practiced through the means of
studying. 

10.5 Relationship happens in the present moment. Studying takes up
residence within the student; there to be mulled over, committed to
memory, integrated into new behaviors. Relationship recognizes that love
is the greatest teacher. Studying places the power of the teacher in a
place other than that of love. Relationship happens as it happens.
Studying is about future outcome. What happens in relationship has
present moment meaning. What is studied has potential meaning. 

10.6 The outcome of learning or what is studied is the production of
things and perceived meaning. 

10.7 What we work toward now is to advance from learning and producing
*things* and *perceived meaning*, to producing unity and relationship
through unity and relationship.  

10.8 The *learning* that was applied to anything other than the Self could
not help but have an outcome that had to do with other than the Self.
Means and end are one, cause and effect the same. Thus this applied
learning produced things and perceived meaning. 

10.9 The learning you have accomplished in regards to your Self could
not help but have an outcome that had to do with your Self. Means and
end are one, cause and effect the same. Thus this accomplished learning
produced unity and relationship through unity and relationship with the
Self. 

10.10 The first accomplishment of your learning about your Self was the
return of unity and relationship to your mind and heart. This returned
to you your ability to recognize or identify your Self as other than a
separate being, and led the way to your recognition of the state of
union. From this recognition of unity and relationship the production of
unity and relationship and true meaning will be revealed. 

10.11 Learning has had to do with what is perceived. *No longer learning*
has to do with what is revealed. Learning has had to do with what is
unknown. *No longer learning* has to do with what is and can only be known
through revelation. Learning has had to do with supplying a lack. *No
longer learning* has to do with the realization that there is no lack.
Learning was what was necessary in order to allow you to fulfill the
desired experience of expressing the Self of love in form. No longer
learning is the revelation that the time of accomplishment is upon you
and the expression of the Self of love in form is what you are now ready
to do. Learning was what was necessary in order to know who you are and
how to express who you are. *No longer learning*, or being accomplished,
is synonymous with knowing who you are and the ability to express who
you are in truth. 

10.12 Expression of the Self of love in form is not something that can
be learned. It is something that can only be lived. This is the time of
the fulfillment of the lesson of the birds of the air who neither sow
nor reap but sing a song of gladness. Expression of the Self of love is
the natural state of being of those who have moved beyond learning to
creating through unity and relationship. 

10.13 As I said earlier, some will not be willing to move out of the
time of learning. Those who have learned what this Course would teach
but do not move beyond the state of learning will change the world. They
will make the world a better place and see many of their students
advance beyond what they can teach and to the state of leaving learning
behind. 

10.14 Those of you willing to leave learning behind will create the new.
This will not happen through learning but through sharing. You can learn
to change the world, but not how to create a new world. Does this not
make sense? You can learn about who you were and who others were, but
you cannot learn anymore who you are or who those are who have joined
you in Christ-consciousness, for you have become who you are and move on
from this starting point to creating who you are anew in unity and
relationship. You can learn from the past but not from the future. When
you build upon what you can learn you build upon the past and create not
the future but an extension of the past. You who are called to leave
learning behind are called to return to your union and relationship with
God wherein you are creators along with God.

