---
treatise: "A Treatise On The New: The Fourth Treatise"
chapter: "4"
title: "Treatise 4, Chapter 4: The Inheritance of Everlasting Life"
---

<sup>4.1</sup> Everywhere within your world you see the pattern of
life-everlasting.  Where there is a pattern of life-everlasting, there
is everlasting life.  Means and end are one, cause and effect the same. 

<sup>4.2</sup> The pattern of life-everlasting is one of changing form.
It is one that is revealed on Earth by birth and death, decay and
renewal, seasons of growth and seasons of decline. This is the pattern
of creation taken to extremes.  Inherent within the extreme is the
balance. Even in the biblical description of creation was a day of rest
spoken of. Creation balanced with rest is the pattern that has been
taken to extremes within your world. You think of birth as creation and
death as rest. You do not realize that your nature, and the nature of
your life, like that of all around you, is governed by seasons natural
to the state of love, seasons of regeneration. 

<sup>4.3</sup> In your history, generations pass, through death, to
allow for new generations to be born. As your planet has reached a state
of growth known as over-population, this balance between old generations
and new seems necessary and even crucial. One generation *must* pass to
make room for the new. 

<sup>4.4</sup> Even before the planet reached the state of
over-population, this idea was much in evidence. The passing of a parent
was seen, particularly historically, as the time of the child of the
parent coming into his or her inheritance or time of fullness. The
*power* and prestige, the earthly wealth of the parent, passed
historically to the son. 

<sup>4.5</sup> This is one of the reasons that I came in the form of the
“son of God.” In the time in which I lived, the idea of inheritance was
an even stronger idea, an idea with much more power than in current
times.  Inherent within the idea of inheritance was an idea of passing
as well as an idea of continuity. What belonged to the Father passed to
the son and thereafter belonged to the son. What was of the Father
continued with the son. 

<sup>4.6</sup> What my life demonstrated was a capacity for inheritance
not based upon death. My life, death and resurrection revealed the power
of inheritance, the power of the Father, as one of life-giving union. I
called you then and I call you now to this inheritance. 

<sup>4.7</sup> This idea of inheritance is a natural idea arising from
the nature of creation itself. It is an idea of continuity that is an
idea consistent with that of creation. There is no discontinuity within
creation. Like begets like. Life begets life. Thus is revealed the
pattern of life-everlasting. 

<sup>4.8</sup> Changing form is part of the pattern of life-everlasting.
The change in the form you now occupy, the change I have spoken of as
that of elevation of the personal self, is a natural part of the pattern
of life-everlasting. It is long over-due. It is long over-due because
you have rejected rather than accepted your inheritance. 

<sup>4.9</sup> This is why this Treatise is called “A Treatise on the
New.” There has not been a time on Earth in which the inheritance of God
the Father was accepted, save by me. This is why this time is spoken of
as the time of fullness. It is the time during which you have within
your awareness the ability to come into your time of fullness by
accepting the inheritance of your Father. You have the awareness and
thus the ability to accept the continuity of life-everlasting. 

<sup>4.10</sup> Lest this sound like the ranting of your science
fiction, and cause you to turn deaf ears to the knowledge I would
impart, let me assure you that immortality is not the change of which I
speak. You are not mortal, and so a word that speaks of an opposite to
what you are not and have never been is not the accurate word. I do not
speak of bodies living forever instead of living for what you call a
lifetime—be it a lifetime of twenty or fifty or ninety years. Life has
continuously been prolonged without a substantial change in the nature
of life. To think of living on and on as you have lived your life thus
far would not appeal to many of you. Those aged and contemplating death
might wish for prolonged life, but many of these same welcome death as
the end to suffering and strife. To continue on endlessly with life as
it has been would only relegate more and more to lives not worth living. 

<sup>4.11</sup> What is it then, of which I speak? If you still must
look ahead and see death looming on the horizon, how can it be that I
speak of life-everlasting? Am I but using new words to repeat what you
have heard in various forms from various religions and systems of belief
for countless ages? Am I but calling you to a happy death and an
afterlife in heaven? 

<sup>4.12</sup> I am calling you to the new. I am calling you to
transform. I am calling you to Christ-consciousness. I am calling you to
everlasting consciousness even while you still abide in form. To be
cognizant or aware of everlasting consciousness while you still abide in
form is to be fully aware that you have life-everlasting. 

<sup>4.13</sup> Being fully aware that you have life-everlasting is
totally different than having faith in an afterlife. Faith is based upon
the unknown. If the unknown were not unknown faith would not be
necessary.  Faith *will* become unnecessary, as life-everlasting becomes
*known* to you. 

<sup>4.14</sup> This knowing will come from the return of true vision.
True vision sees life-everlasting where perception but saw finite life
and mortal bodies. Once vision and Christ-consciousness have returned to
you, the means of life-everlasting will be understood as a choice.
Because there was no relationship save that of intermediaries between
the human and the divine, there was no choice but to end the separated
state in order to return to unity through death. Once the return to
unity has occurred in form, the decision to continue in form or to not
continue in form will be yours.

<sup>4.15</sup> Continuity is an attribute of relationship, not of
matter. It is only in the relationship of matter to the divine that
matter can become divine and thus eternal. If you can abide in unity
while in human form, you will have no cause, save your own choice, to
leave human form. To abide in unity is to abide in your natural state, a
state of life-everlasting. To abide in a state of separation is to abide
in an unnatural state from which you eventually will seek release.

<sup>4.16</sup> Although this discussion is likely to cause many of you
serious doubts about the truth and applicability of this Course, this
discussion is necessary to your awareness of Christ-consciousness. To
believe that you are mortal is to believe that you must die to the
personal self of form in order to be reborn as a true Self. This is an
old way of thinking. Have we not worked throughout this Course to return
your true identity to you *now*? The joining of heart and mind in
relationship is the joining of the personal self with the true Self *in
the reality in which you exist now*. Remember, the heart must abide in
the reality where you think you are. Only through your mind’s acceptance
of your new reality has the heart been freed to exist in the new reality
that is the state of unity and relationship. 

<sup>4.17</sup> Can you not see the necessity of removing the idea that
your true Self will be returned to you only through death? What purpose
would this Course serve if it were just another preview of what to
expect after you die? What difference would this make to your way of
living or the world in which you live? 

<sup>4.18</sup> What purpose will death serve when your true Self has
joined with your physical form? You will see it simply as the
transformation it has always been, the transformation from singular
consciousness to Christ-consciousness. Form has been but a
representation of singular consciousness. As form becomes a
representation of Christ-consciousness, it will take on the nature of
Christ-consciousness, of which my life was the example life. To sustain
Christ-consciousness in form is creation of the new. My one example life
could not sustain Christ-consciousness for those who came after me but
could only be an example. What you are called to do is to, through your
multitude, sustain Christ-consciousness, and thus create the union of
the human and the divine as a new state of being. This union will take
you beyond the goal of expressing your Self in form because this goal
but reflected the desire for a temporary experience. The temporary
experience has been elongated because of the appeal of the physical
experience. What this Treatise is saying to you is that *if* the
physical experience appeals to you, and *if* you create the union of the
human and the divine as a new state of being, this choice will be
eternally yours. It will be a choice of your creation, a creation devoid
of fear. It will be a new choice.

