---
treatise: "A Treatise On The New: The Fourth Treatise"
chapter: "11"
title: "Treatise 4, Chapter 11: The End of Learning and the
Sustainability of Christ&ndash;Consciousness"
---

<sup>11.1</sup> The future is yet to be created. This is why I stated at
the onset of this Treatise that this Treatise would not be predictive.
Many predictions of the future have been made, and many of them have
been called prophecy. But the future is yet to be created. 

<sup>11.2</sup> The future depends on you who are willing to leave
learning behind and who are willing to accept your new roles as creators
of the newâ€”creators of the future. 

<sup>11.3</sup> Can I teach you to do this? My dear brothers and sisters
in Christ, as you once willingly resigned as your own teacher, I now
willingly resign as your teacher. In unity there is no need for teachers
or for learners. There is need only for the sustainability of
Christ-consciousness in which we exist together as creators in unity and
relationship. 

<sup>11.4</sup> Thus I will conclude this Treatise with a prelude to the
sharing that is our new means of communicating and creating, a sharing
that replaces learning with what is beyond learning. I conclude this
Treatise by sharing that which will assist you in sustaining
Christ-consciousness. 

<sup>11.5</sup> As I do so, I bid you to read these words in a new way.
You are no longer a learner here and what I reveal to you must be
regarded as the equal sharing between brothers and sisters in Christ,
the sharing of fellow creators in unity and relationship. This is the
beginning of our co-creation. Do not seek for me to impart knowledge to
you in these concluding words. Absorb the following pages as a memory
returned to your reunited heart and mind. No longer regard me as an
authority to whom you turn, but as an equal partner in the creation of
the future through the sustainability of Christ-consciousness.

