---
treatise: "A Treatise On The New: The Fourth Treatise"
chapter: "8"
title: "Treatise 4, Chapter 8: To Come to Know"
---

<sup>8.1</sup> You are now beginning to reach the stage of understanding
wherein you can realize that it was not some separate “you” or some
species without form who at some point in time chose to express love in
physical form, and so began this experience of human life. You are now
beginning to be able to understand that it was God who made this choice.
This was the Creator making a choice. Creation’s response was the
universe, which is an expression of God’s love, an expression of God’s
choice, a representation of God’s intent. 

<sup>8.2</sup> I say you are only now beginning to reach a stage where
you can understand this, but what I really mean is that you are only now
reaching a stage wherein you can know, within your inner being, that
this is the truth. I say this because it is only now that you can come
to know this truth without reverting to old ideas of not having had
“yourself” any choice in the matter, or reverting to old ideas of
blaming God for all that has ensued since this choice. I say this
because only now are you beginning to be ready to hear that you and God
are the same. That when I say “God made a choice” I am not saying that
you did not. I am saying that a choice was made within the one mind, the
one heart, and that this was your choice as well as God’s choice. It was
one choice made in unity. It was the choice of all for life-everlasting
and life ever-expressing. It was the choice for creation, for creation
is the expression of love. 

<sup>8.3</sup> The heart of God is the center of the universe, as your
own heart is the center of your being. The mind of God is the source of
all ideas, just as “your” mind is the source of your ideas. 

<sup>8.4</sup> Let us dwell again, for just a moment before we let this
dwelling in the past go forever, on what has “gone wrong” with God’s
expression of love. 

<sup>8.5</sup> Creation in form had a starting point. This is the nature
of everything that lives in form. It has a starting point from which it
grows into its time of fullness. Creation on the scale at which God
creates produced the universe, or in actuality, many universes. These
universes grew and changed, ebbed and flowed, materialized and
dematerialized in natural cycles of the creation process that once begun
was unending and thus was ever creating anew. So too is it with you. 

<sup>8.6</sup> Each expression of God’s love, being of God, continued to
express love through expression of its nature, which was of God. What
happened in the case of human beings, was a disconnect from your own
true nature, which in turn caused a disconnect in your ability to
express love, which in turn caused a disconnect in your ability to know
God, because you did not know yourself. 

<sup>8.7</sup> The expression of your true nature should never have been
difficult, joyless, or fearful; but you cannot imagine what a creative
undertaking the human being was! If you can imagine for a moment
yourself as a being whose every thought became manifest, as perhaps you
can envision from remembering your dreams in which anything can happen
without any need for you to “do” anything, and then becoming a form
where expressing yourself depended upon what you could “do” with the
human body, you can imagine the learning process that ensued. If your
reality had been like unto the reality you experience in dreams, can you
not see that you would have to learn to breathe, to speak, to walk, much
as a baby learns to do these things, and that these things were loving
acts within a loving universe, a love-filled learning process. A
learning process that was as known to you and chosen by you as it was by
God, because you and God are one. 

<sup>8.8</sup> You might ask how, if what I’m saying is true, could God
disconnect from himself? What God could not disconnect from was the true
nature of the being of God, which is love. What God could not disconnect
from was the true nature of creation, which is love. What God, in effect
had to do, what *you* in effect had to do in order to live in a nature
inconsistent with that from which God could not disconnect, was
disconnect from God. Since God was the center of your being, it was
impossible to disconnect your heart and still live. What could be
disconnected was your will—or in other words, your mind. Just as it is
your nature to breathe oxygen, and not breathing oxygen is thus
inconsistent with your nature, fearfulness is inconsistent with God.
Judgment is inconsistent with God. Bondage or lack of freedom is
inconsistent with God. 

<sup>8.9</sup> God always knew what your mind chose to rebel against:
that creation is perfect. Your mind, being of God, was constrained by
the learning limits of the body and chose to rebel against the learning
that was needed in order to come into the time of fullness of a being
able to express itself in form, never realizing that this just delayed
the learning that had to occur to release you from the limits you
struggled against. The constant striving to be more and more, faster and
faster—each being’s yearning, passionate, excessive drive to fulfill its
purpose, like a drive to explore the ocean before knowing how to swim or
the drive to explore new lands while still believing the Earth to be
flat—God saw and knew to be consistent with the nature of man, even
while the fear and struggle that this impatience generated was
inconsistent with God. 

<sup>8.10</sup> Thus, what could God then do? What does creation do with
a storm arising on the horizon, growing out of atmospheric conditions
perfect to generate its violence? What do you, who are parents, do with
a child who is too impatient, too bright, too eager, to learn slowly and
mature gracefully? Do you withdraw your love?  Never. Do you disinherit?
Rarely. What you do is realize the impossibility of imposing your will
and, because of this impossibility, you realize that you must let go.
Your decision was also God’s decision.

<sup>8.11</sup> In following in the way of God’s original intent, you
rebelled against God’s original design, the design that is the pattern
of creation. Yet your rebellion was not with God, although you came to
see it as such. Your rebellion was not *allowed*, it was mutually
*chosen*. Just as, as a parent, you come to see that you cannot fight a
child’s nature, no matter how different it might be from your own—just
as in extreme cases you see that you cannot stop your child from
perilous behavior save by taking away their freedom through the most
extreme of measures—this is what happened between you and God. 

<sup>8.12</sup> To take away your freedom in order to protect you, even
from yourself, would not have been an act of love. To take away *your*
freedom would be to take away God’s own freedom, the freedom of
creation. Your rebellion against the constraints of your nature in form
thus became part of the pattern of creation because it was the created’s
response.  It was your response, and since God is both the Creator and
the Created, it was God’s response as well. 

<sup>8.13</sup> As you begin to live as both the Created and the
Creator, you expand and enrich God. What other purpose would God ever
have had for wanting to express the Love that is Himself in form, if it
were not for the expansion and enrichment it would add to His being?
What purpose is behind your own desire to do thus? 

<sup>8.14</sup> It was only the ego that made this desire seem to be for
anything other than the purpose of expansion and enrichment of your
being. If it is only in sharing who you are through expression of who
you are that you come to know who you are, then this is true of God as
well. God could not be the only being in all of creation who remains
static and unchanging! How could this possibly be said of one whose name
and identity is synonymous with creation? You like to think that God
knows everything, and God surely knows everything that *is*. But
consciousness of what *is*, the Christ-consciousness that allows you to
be in communion with God, is not a static state. While consciousness of
the truth is never-changing, consciousness of the truth is also
ever-expanding. 

<sup>8.15</sup> Does one know love in one burst of knowing and never
know more of love? Does one *grasp* beauty and thereafter remain ever
unstirred by it?  Is not the very essence of consciousness itself this
ability to come to know continuously? To be aware constantly of what
*is*, is to continuously come to know and yet to never not know.

<sup>8.16</sup> You think of a state of knowing as a state of there
being nothing you do not know about something. This is why you study
subjects—so that you can come to this completion and enjoy this
certainty and pride that at least you know all there is to know about
this one thing. This was the ego’s answer to being a learning
being—choosing something to learn that it could master. Yet all that
this was, was a desire to be done with learning, which is a true desire
consistent with your true nature and your purpose here. To learn
everything there is to know about even one subject, and to call that
learning complete, is an error. If you rethink this definition you will
see that even in regards to the learning of one subject it is not the
truth. The only instance in which this is the truth is in regards to
learning who you are. 

<sup>8.17</sup> Learning, dear brothers and sisters, does come to an
end, and that end is fast approaching. Coming to know through learning
will be of the past as soon as Christ-consciousness is sustainable and
you begin to come to know through constant revelation of what *is*. True
learning has had only one purpose—the purpose of returning you to
awareness of your true identity.  Be done with learning now as you
accept who you truly are.

