---
treatise: "A Treatise On The New: The Fourth Treatise"
chapter: "9"
title: "Treatise 4, Chapter 9: Beyond Learning"
---

<sup>9.1</sup> Learning is not meant to last. This is why even this
*coursework* comes to an end. It comes to an end here and now as we move
past *study* and *learning* to observation, vision, and revelation. 

<sup>9.2</sup> All groups who *study* this *coursework* must also
eventually come to an end. For this *end* to learning is the goal toward
which we now work. 

<sup>9.3</sup> You have realized that all of your learning and studying
has taken you as far as you can go.  You complete your study of
Christianity and go on to study Buddhism. You complete your study of
Buddhism and go on to study any number of other religions, philosophies,
sciences. You read books that are channeled, books that tell of personal
experiences, books that promise ten steps to success. You go out in
search of experiences of a mystical nature. You have tried drugs or
hypnosis, meditation or work with energy. You have read and listened and
been enthralled by those who have synthesized all of the great learning
that has gone on so that they can tell you where it is that all these
great teachings are leading. All of these learned works that speak the
truth—from ancient times through current times—are learned works that
have been worthy of your study. These learned works are the precursors
that have shown the way to creating unity and relationship through unity
and relationship. 

<sup>9.4</sup> But now the time is upon you to leave learned works
behind in favor of observation, vision and revelation. Now is the time
to leave behind study for imagining, envisioning, and desire. Now is the
time to move out of the time of becoming who you are to the time of
being who you are. 

<sup>9.5</sup> You have felt this time coming. You have realized that
your learning has reached an end point. The excitement of new learning
is not lasting because it is not new. You have begun to see that all
messages of the truth say the same thing but in different ways. There
seems to be nothing new to be said, nothing to move you beyond this
point that you have reached in your understanding of the truth. All the
learning that you have done seems to leave you ready to change and able
to change in certain ways that make life easier or more peaceful, but
certainly not able to realize the transformation that your learning has
seemed to promise.

<sup>9.6</sup> Do not accept this lack of fulfillment of a promise that
has surely been made! Rejoice that the new time is here and be ready to
embrace it as it embraces you! 

<sup>9.7</sup> Realize that the self-centeredness of the final stage of
your learning has been necessary. Only by centering your study upon
yourself have you been made ready finally to be loosed of the bounds of
the personal self. This time of concentration on the self is
unparalleled in history. It is what has been needed. Be grateful to all
of the forerunners of the new who have been courageous enough to call
you to examine yourself. Be grateful to yourself that you have had the
courage to listen and to learn and to study what these forerunners of
the new, these prophets of the new have called you to learn. Be
appreciative of every tool that has advanced your progress. But now be
willing to leave them behind. 

<sup>9.8</sup> These have been the last of the intermediaries, these
called to a wisdom beyond their personal capacity.  Now these
forerunners of the new, along with you, are called to step beyond what
they have learned to what can only be revealed. These are my beloved,
along with you, and this an entreaty meant especially for them.

<sup>9.9</sup> You who have provided a service cherished by God, and who
have risen in the esteem of your brothers and sisters, be beacons now to
the new.  You who have gained so much through your learning and your
study and your sharing of the same may find it difficult to leave it
behind. A choice made by you to stay with learning rather than to move
beyond it would be an understandable choice, but you are needed now.
Needed to help establish the covenant of the new. Be not afraid, for the
glory that has been yours will be as nothing to the glory that awaits
you in the creation of the new. You will always be honored for what you
have done. But do you want this to be forever the cause of your honor?
Be willing to be the forerunners still, to join your brothers and
sisters in this next phase of the journey, the journey out of the time
of learning that will usher in the fullness of time.

