---
treatise: "A Treatise On The New: The Fourth Treatise"
chapter: "1"
title: "Treatise 4, Chapter 1: All Are Chosen"
---

<sup>1.1</sup> Let me tell you what this Treatise will not be about. It
will not be predictive. It will leave no one out. It will not appeal to
fear nor give you cause for fear. It will not be about tools or tell you
that some have the tools for accomplishment and that others do not. It
will continue the view from within the embrace, an embrace and a view
that is inclusive of all. 

<sup>1.2</sup> It will, however, be conclusive. It will separate truth
from illusion in ways that will make some uncomfortable. It will
continue to challenge your former ideas and beliefs as have the previous
Treatises.  But it will do this only to reach a conclusion of certainty
from which you can live. 

<sup>1.3</sup> In doing so, it may seem to you as if some will be left
out and as if you are being told that you can achieve what many others
have tried and failed to achieve. These are the types of ideas that will
cause discomfort to many of you as you still find it hard to believe in
your own worthiness, and particularly in your own chosenness. It is this
idea of being chosen that will cause your mind to conclude that some are
not chosen now and that many were not chosen in the past. 

<sup>1.4</sup> Can you choose what is unavailable for choosing? Can you
choose to own another’s property? Take another’s husband or wife?
Choosing is not taking. Choosing implies relationship. Just as there are
answers to choose between on a test, some of them correct and some of
them incorrect, there are some answers that are not offered to be chosen
because they do not relate to the question. All of the commandments and
all of the beliefs of all of the world’s religions are but related to
this idea of choosing, a process of the free will with which you all are
endowed. 

<sup>1.5</sup> A question has been asked and a response is awaited. Are
you willing to be chosen? Are you willing to be the chosen of God? All
are asked.  What is your answer? 

<sup>1.6</sup> Why, you might ask, is a word such as *chosen* used, when
many other words would do, and when the concept of *being chosen* is one
laden with so many false ideas about exclusivity? I am using this word
specifically because of the precedent of its use historically. Many
different groups believe they are the chosen people of God, or Buddha,
or Muhammad. Many of this generation believe they are a chosen
generation. Neither way of thinking is wrong. All are chosen.

<sup>1.7</sup> An elementary example might be useful. In many countries,
all are given the opportunity to go to school. This might be as easily
stated as all are chosen for schooling. Some might look at this as lack
of choice, saying that anything that is mandatory allows no room for
choice. In their rebellion against the mandatory nature of their
chosenness or opportunity, they might easily choose not to learn. The
nature of life, however, is one of learning, and if they do not learn
what is taught in school, they will, by default, learn what is not
taught in school. If you can consider this example with no judgment, you
can see it simply as a choice.  

<sup>1.8</sup> As is clearly being seen amid many school systems in the
current time, the choice to not learn what is taught in school, when
taken up by many, becomes a crisis in education that calls for education
to change.  It may signal that what is taught is no longer relevant, or
that the means of teaching what is relevant no longer works. It may be a
choice made regarding means or content, a choice made from fear or made
from love. But there is, in other words, no lack of choice. A choice is
always made. A choice to accept or reject, say yes or say no, to learn
this or to learn that, to learn now or to learn later. 

<sup>1.9</sup> There but seems to be a difference in the “educated”
choice and the “uneducated” choice. Many of you may look back on choices
that you made and say, “I would have chosen differently if I had but
known” this or that. The choice is the way of coming to know. No choice
is not such. No choice ever excludes anyone from coming to know his or
her chosen lesson.

<sup>1.10</sup> This curriculum is mandatory and so some have rebelled
and will rebel against it. Those who do not choose to learn from the
curriculum, will, like school children, learn through what is not of the
curriculum because they have *chosen* another *means* of learning.
*Means* is what is being spoken of here. But all means are for one end.
All will learn the same content, for all are chosen; and all learning,
no matter what the means, will eventually lead them to the truth of who
they are. 

<sup>1.11</sup> The choice that lies before you now concerns what it is
you would come to know. The question asked throughout this Course is if
you are willing to make the choice to come to know your Self and God
*now*. This is the same as being asked if you are willing to be the
chosen of God.  This is the same question that has been asked throughout
the existence of time. Some have chosen to come to know themselves and
God directly.  Others have chosen to come to know themselves and God
indirectly. These are the only two choices, the choices between truth
and illusion, fear and love, unity and separation, now and later. What
you must understand is that all choices will lead to knowledge of Self
and God, as no choices are offered that are not such. All are chosen and
so it could not be otherwise. But at the same time, it must be seen that
your choice matters *in time*, even if all will make the same choice
eventually.

<sup>1.12</sup> As was said within “A Treatise on the Personal Self,”
even the house of illusion is held within the embrace of love, of God,
of the truth.  Does this sound exclusive to you? The embrace is
inclusive. All are chosen. 

<sup>1.13</sup> And yet, as many of you have come instinctively to feel,
something is different now. You are beginning to become excited by the
feeling that something different is possible; that you might just be
able to achieve what others have not; that this time might just be
different than any other time. Even as you begin to tentatively let this
excitement grow, your loyalty to your race, species, and the past,
hinders your excitement. If what you are beginning to believe might be
possible is possible, and has been possible, are you to look on all of
those who have come before you as failures? Has the seed of the future
lain dormant in the past? Could it have been activated hundreds or
thousands of years ago, by countless souls more worthy than you, and
ushered in the time of heaven on earth and the end of suffering long
ago? Could many have been spared who weren’t? How capricious this must
seem in your imaginings. What a fickle universe. What a perverse God. If
an end to suffering and fear has been possible, and is possible, why has
it not come to be? Why has it not been known? What could possibly make
you believe it could come to be now when it didn’t come to be before?

<sup>1.14</sup> The only answer might seem to lie in the laws of
evolution, the slow learning and adaptive process of man. Surely this
would seem a likely answer and one to assuage your guilt and
uncertainty, your fear of believing in yourself and in this time as the
time to end all time.  There must be something different about this
time, the capabilities of those existing within it. It must be your
science or technology, your advanced mental abilities, or even your
leisure time that has opened up this opportunity. The only alternative
would seem to be that this must be simply the chosen time and you the
chosen people. If the chosen time had been two thousand years ago, life
would have been different since then. If Jesus Christ were the chosen
one, his life would have changed the world. If the Israelites were the
chosen people, so much calamity would not have befallen them. And so the
idea of choice rears its head again and wraps the simple statement that
All Are Chosen in confusion.

<sup>1.15</sup> This confusion is what this Treatise will seek to dispel
so that you are left with no confusion and only certainty. The only
thing that will dispel this confusion and bring you the certainty that
is needed to create the new world is an understanding of creation and
your role within it, both as Creators and Created. 

<sup>1.16</sup> As was said within “A Treatise on the Personal Self,”
all notions of blame must be gone from you. Thus, you are asked not to
look back with blame, for no such cause for blame exists. No cause to
look back exists at all, for the truth exists in the present. This is
the same as saying the truth exists within you. It is in this way that
time is not real and will no longer be real to you as you come to live
by the truth.  It is in this way that the truth of the past still lives
and that the illusion of the past never was. 

<sup>1.17</sup> The difference between this time and the time that has
but seemed to have gone before has already been stated as the difference
between the time of the Holy Spirit and the time of Christ. This has
also been restated as the difference between the time of learning
through contrast and the time of learning through observation. It is
further stated here as the difference between learning by contrast and
indirect communication and learning through observation and direct
communication or experience. The same truth has always existed, but the
choice of a means of coming to know the truth has shifted. All were
chosen and all are chosen. 

<sup>1.18</sup> You have completed God’s act of choosing you by choosing
God. This is all the chosen people are in time—those who have chosen God
as God has chosen them. That you have chosen God and chosen a new means
of coming to know the truth—the means of Christ-consciousness—is what
has ushered in the new time. 

<sup>1.19</sup> Many came to know the truth by indirect means and shared
what they came to know through similarly indirect means. This is the
nature of learning and of sharing in relationship. Means and end are
one. Cause and effect are the same. It is these indirect means of
communicating the truth that have led to your advances in science and
technology, and to the refinement of your minds, hearts and senses, not
the reverse. Your ancestors have done you a great service. With the
means they had available—in the chosen means of a chosen consciousness
united in oneness with the Holy Spirit—they passed on, indirectly, all
that they came to know. This indirect means of communication is the
reason for the existence of churches, and these means too have served
you well. 

<sup>1.20</sup> But these indirect means of communication left much open
to interpretation.  Different interpretations of indirectly received
truth resulted in different religions and varying sets of beliefs that,
in the way of the time—the way of learning through contrast—provided
contrast through dissent. The good in which one believed became the evil
that another fought and in the contrast learning did occur and has
continued to occur even unto this time. You have learned much of the
nature of the truth by seeing what you have perceived as the contrast
between good and evil.

<sup>1.21</sup> It is the truth that you have now learned all that can
be learned from this state of consciousness and that you have given your
willingness to learn in a new way. The new way is here. If you are now
to learn directly, you are also now to share directly. This is the way
of learning in relationship. Means and end are one. Cause and effect are
the same. 

<sup>1.22</sup> You have felt this shift coming and so has the world.
This is the yearning we have spoken of as the proof of love’s existence
and of your existence in a state of unity rather than a state of
separation.  This yearning called you to the limits of the state of
consciousness that was the time of the Holy Spirit. This limit acted
upon you as a catalyst to create desire for the new. It is what has
caused your growing impatience with the personal self, with acquiring
all that your new learning in science and technology but seemed to
offer. It is what has caused your growing desire for meaning and
purpose. It is what has caused you to finally be ready to still your
fear, a fear that once prevented the direct and observable learning that
now is available to you. 

<sup>1.23</sup> While the state of the world and the people within it
may not outwardly seem much changed from the world of your ancestors
despite the advances of learning that have taken place, it is a
different world. You have not known the secret yearning in the hearts of
your brothers and sisters, nor have you known that it matched your own.
You may have seen the acts that this yearning has driven them to and
thought, incorrectly, that the new time that is here is the end of the
days of innocence. You may have thought it advantageous to have once
been so clearly able to see the contrast between good and evil and feel
now as if these distinctions have become more and more obscure. Some
have yearned for a return to days not long past, days during which
distinctions between right and wrong did seem to be more certain. But
the very blurring of these edges have been the forerunners, the signs of
the shift in consciousness that is occurring. 

<sup>1.24</sup> All across the world, people of the world have been
demanding to learn directly, through experience, and saying “no more” to
the lessons of the intermediaries. What has grown in you has grown in
your children and they are not only ready, but also demanding to learn
through observation and direct communication or experience. Many not yet
grown to maturity have been born into the time of Christ, and do not fit
within the time or the consciousness of the Holy Spirit. 

<sup>1.25</sup> For a short time, an overlap is occurring during which
those unable to allow themselves to become aware of the new state of
consciousness are resisting it, again indirectly. Some occupy themselves
with mind and spirit numbing activities in order to block it out, having
chosen to die within the state of consciousness in which they have
lived. Others do not wish to experience the truth directly, but only to
experience experience. They are in the desperate throes of wanting to
experience everything before they allow themselves to directly
experience the truth, thinking still that the experience of the truth
will exclude much that they would want to try before they give in to its
pull and settle there. But all have become aware that a new experience
awaits and that they stand at the threshold of choice. 

<sup>1.26</sup> Those born into the time of Christ will settle for
nothing less than the truth and will soon begin looking earnestly for
it. Even the ego-self will be perceived clearly by these, and they will
not want it for their identity but only will accept it until another
identity is offered. 

<sup>1.27</sup> Let me repeat that during the time of the Holy Spirit,
some were able to come to know themselves and God through the indirect
means of this state of consciousness and to pass on what they learned
through indirect means.  Fewer were able to achieve a state of
consciousness in which direct communication was possible, to come to
know themselves and God directly, and to pass on this learning through
direct means. What I am saying is that it is not impossible for those
who remain unaware of the new consciousness to come to know themselves
and God, and to continue to pass their learning on indirectly, or
through indirect communication and contrast. But this also means that
the great majority will become aware of the new state of consciousness
and that learning will pass through them directly through observation
and direct communication or experience. It means that the last
generation born into the time of the Holy Spirit will live out their
lives and that soon all who remain on earth will be those born into the
time of Christ. 

<sup>1.28</sup> This is the truth of the state of the world in which you
exist today.

