---
treatise: "A Treatise On The New: The Fourth Treatise"
chapter: "2"
title: "Treatise 4, Chapter 2: Shared Vision"
---

<sup>2.1</sup> Outward seeking is turning inward. Inward or internal
discoveries are turning outward. This is a reverse, a polar reversal
that is happening worldwide, externally as well as internally. It is
happening.  It is not predictive. I have never been and will never be
predictive, for I am Christ-consciousness. Christ-consciousness is
awareness of what *is*. Only an awareness of what *is*, an awareness
that does not conceive of such as what was and will be can peacefully
coexist with the unity that is here and now in truth. 

<sup>2.2</sup> Again let me repeat and reemphasize my statements: where
once you turned outward in your seeking and saw within what you
perceived without, now you turn inward and reflect what you discover
within outward. What you discover within is in a way that what you
perceive without is not. 

<sup>2.3</sup> I have always been a proponent of The Way of
Christ-consciousness as The Way to Self and God. 

<sup>2.4</sup> There was no Way or path or process back to God and Self
before me.  It was the time of man wandering in the wilderness. I came
as a representation or demonstration of The Way. This is why I have been
called “The Way, The Truth and The Life.” I came to show The Way to
Christ-consciousness, which is The Way to God and Self. But I also came
to provide an intermediary, for this is what was desired, a bridge
between the human or forgotten self and the divine or remembered Self.
Jesus the man was the intermediary who ushered in the time of the Holy
Spirit by calling the Holy Spirit to possess the human or forgotten self
with the spirit of the divine or remembered Self. Although God never
abandoned the humans who seeded the Earth, the humans, in the state of
the forgotten self, could not know God because of their fear. I revealed
a God of Love and the Holy Spirit provided for indirect and less fearful
means of communion or communication with God. 

<sup>2.5</sup> The people of the Earth, as well as all that was created,
have always been the beloved of God because Love was and is the means of
creation. The people of the Earth, as well as all that was created, were
created through union and relationship. Creation through union and
relationship is still The Way and The Way has come into the time of its
fullness. 

<sup>2.6</sup> The production that has so long occupied you will now
serve you as you turn your productive and reproductive instincts to the
production and reproduction of relationship and union.

<sup>2.7</sup> But before we can proceed forward, I must return to and
dispel any illusion you may have of superiority over those who came
before. That those who came before did not become aware of their true
nature does not mean that it did not exist; that there are others living
among you in this time who will not become aware of their true nature
does not mean that it does not exist within them. You are no more
accomplished than anyone has been or is or will be. The truth of who you
are is as accomplished as the truth of all of your brothers and sisters
from the beginning of time until the end of time. Any text that tells
you that you or those of your kind or time are more or better than any
other is not speaking the truth. This is why we began with the chosen
and will return again and again to the statement that *all are chosen*. 

<sup>2.8</sup> I belabor this point because you literally cannot proceed
to full awareness while ideas such as *more* and *better* remain in you.
As I have said before, this is not about evolution unless you wish to
speak of evolution in terms of awareness. You must realize that if you
were to see into the eyes and hearts of any human from any time with
true vision, you would see the accomplished Self there. There can be no
judgment carried forward with you and when you continue to believe in a
process of evolution that has made you better than those who came
before, you are carrying judgment. While you continue to believe that
being chosen means that some are not chosen, you are carrying judgment.
While you continue to believe that a final judgment will separate the
good from the evil, you are carrying judgment. 

<sup>2.9</sup> I also belabor this point because those of you familiar
with the Bible, upon hearing words such as the end of time or the
fullness of time, think of the predictions of the biblical end of time.
I speak of this because it is in your awareness and because many false
interpretations of this time as a time of judgment and of separating the
chosen people from all others abound. All are chosen. All are chosen
with love and without judgment.

<sup>2.10</sup> The idea of separation is an idea that is not consistent
with the idea of unity. If you proceed into this new time thinking that
this new time will separate you from others, or cause you, as *the
chosen*, to be separate, you will not become fully aware of the new
time. Full awareness of the new is what this Treatise seeks to
accomplish and so it is necessary to belabor these false ideas that
would keep you from this awareness. If you think you can observe in
judgment you do not understand the definition of observation provided in
“A Treatise on the Personal Self.” 

<sup>2.11</sup> Being first does not mean being better. That I was the
first to demonstrate what you can be does not mean I am better than you.
Just as in your sporting events, a “first” is applauded, and soon a new
record replaces that record-setting first; just as someone had to be
“first” to fly a plane or land on the moon, being first implies only
that there will be a second and a third. That attention and respect is
given to those who first achieve anything of merit is but a way of
calling all others to know what they can achieve. One may desire to best
a sporting record and another to follow the first man into space and the
one who desires to best a sporting record may feel no desire to follow
the first man into space and vice versa, and yet, what one achieves but
opens the door for others and this is known to you. Even those who did
not desire to fly in a plane when this feat was first accomplished have
since flown in planes. 

<sup>2.12</sup> Similarly, those who have achieved “first place” do so
realizing that the elevated “place” they briefly hold is of a finite
nature, that others will soon do the same, and that those who follow in
time will do so more easily, with less effort, and with even greater
success. They may consider themselves “better than” for a moment in
time, but those who do will be bitterly disappointed as their moment
passes. Despite the necessity for a confidence that has led them to
achieve their desired end, most who so achieve and become the first to
set records, discover, or invent the new, are not aware of themselves as
“better than” for their goal was not to be better than anyone but
themselves. Surely many desire to be “the best” as a means to glorify
the ego, but few of these succeed for the ego cannot be glorified.

<sup>2.13</sup> Thus, you must examine your intention even now and
remove from it all ideas that were of the old way. You would not be here
if you were still interested in glorifying the ego, but you also are not
yet completely certain of your Self and in your uncertainty, still
subject to the patterns of thought of the old. Many of these patterns do
not concern me for they will fall away of themselves as your awareness
of the new grows. But these few that I linger on will prevent your
awareness of the new from growing, and so must be consciously left
behind. 

<sup>2.14</sup> It is difficult for you, because of the patterns of the
past, to believe that you are chosen to be the pioneers into a new time
without believing that you are special. This is one of the many reasons
we have worked to dispel your ideas of specialness. One of the best
means for us to clarify the lack of specialness implied in the statement
that all are chosen, is through your observation of yourself. 

<sup>2.15</sup> The ability to observe what the Self expresses was among
the original reasons for this chosen experience. Observe now the
expressions of the self you are and have been. Although you are
different now than you were as a child, and different now than you were
a few years ago, and different now than when you began your learning of
this Course, you are not other than whom you have always been. Who you
are now was there when you were a child, and there in all the years
since then, and there before you began your learning of this Course.
Your *awareness* of the Self that you are now was not present in the
past, but you can truly now, with the devotion of the observant, see
that the Self you are now was indeed present, and the truth of who you
were always. 

<sup>2.16</sup> How, then, could you possibly observe any others without
knowing that the truth of who they are is present even though it might
seem not to be? This is the power of the devotion of the observant that
you are called to, the power of cause and its effect. This is the power
you now have within you, the power to observe the truth rather than
illusion.  This is the power to observe what *is*. This is
Christ-consciousness. 

<sup>2.17</sup> I repeat, this is the power to observe what is. It is
not about observing a potential for what could be if your brother or
sister would just follow in the way that has been shown to you. It is
about observing what is. The power to observe what is is what will keep
you unified with your brothers and sisters rather than separating you
from them. There is no power without this unity. You cannot see “others”
as other than who they are and know your power. You must see as I see
and see that all are chosen. 

<sup>2.18</sup> Only from this shared vision, this observation of what
*is*, can you begin to produce unity and relationship *through* unity
and relationship. 

<sup>2.19</sup> This is why it has long been stated that you are not
called to evangelize or convince anyone of the merits of this course of
study.  This is just a course of study. Those whom you would seek to
evangelize or convince are as holy as your Self. This holiness need only
be observed. When you think in terms of evangelizing or convincing, you
think in terms of future outcome rather than in terms of what already
is. This type of thinking will not serve the new or allow you full
awareness of the new.

<sup>2.20</sup> Can you remember this, blessed sons and daughters of the
most high?  Your brothers and sisters are as holy as your Self. Holiness
is the natural harmony of all that was created as it was created. 

<sup>2.21</sup> Now I tell you something else and hope you will remember
it and bid it true.  Each day is a creation and holy too. Not one day is
meant to be lived within a struggle with what it brings. The power to
observe what is relates to everything that exists with you, including
the days that make up your life in time and space. Observing what is
unites you with the present in that it unites you with what *is* rather
than with what you perceive to be. 

<sup>2.22</sup> Observation of what *is*, is a natural effect of the
cause of a heart and mind joined in unity. This first joining in unity,
the joining of heart and mind, joins the physical and the spiritual
world in a relationship of which you can be more and more steadily
aware. It is a new relationship. Unity always existed. Oneness always
existed. God always existed. But you separated yourself from direct
awareness of your *relationship* with unity, with oneness, and with God,
just as you separated yourself from relationship with the wholeness of
the pattern of creation. You have believed in God and perhaps in some
concept of unity or oneness, but you have also denied even the
possibility of experiencing your own direct relationship with God, or
the possibility that your life is a direct experience of the pattern of
unity or oneness that is creation. 

<sup>2.23</sup> Think of this denial now, for it is still evident in the
pattern of your thinking. We have spoken of this within the text of *A
Course of Love* as your inability to realize the relationship that
exists with the unseen and even the seen. You have moved through life
believing you have relationships with family and friends and co-workers,
occasionally acknowledging brief relationships that develop with
acquaintances or strangers, connections that feel real with like-minded
associates for brief periods of time, but still essentially seeing
yourself moving through life alone, with few sustaining connections save
for special relationships, and with little purpose implied in the brief
encounters you have with others. You have watched the news and
developments in parts of the world far away from you and at times are
aware of ecological and sociological connections, or of other
occurrences that are likely to have an impact on your life or on your
part of the world.  But unless you believe in the ability for what
happens to have an effect on you, you do not consider yourself to have a
relationship with the occurrence. 

<sup>2.24</sup> With your new understanding of observance must come a
new understanding of relationship and the ability of the devotion of the
observant to affect those relationships.

<sup>2.25</sup> Yet we have strayed here from the overriding point of
what I have revealed to you. A *new* relationship now exists between the
physical and spiritual. It is not an indirect relationship but a direct
relationship.  It exists and you are becoming aware of its existence.
You will increasingly be unable to deny it and you will not want to. As
you allow awareness of this relationship to grow in you, you will learn
the lessons that are being spoken of within this Treatise. 

<sup>2.26</sup> This new relationship is the only state in which
observation of what *is* can occur. The separated state was nothing more
than the disjoining of heart and mind, a state in which mind attempted
to know without the relationship of the heart, and so merely perceived
its own creations, rather than the creations birthed in unity. 

<sup>2.27</sup> Let this idea gestate a moment within you and reveal to
you the truth of which it speaks. The separated state of the mind
created its own separate world. Cause and effect are one. The perceived
state of separation created the perceived state of a separate world. The
real state of union, returned to you through the joining of mind and
heart, will now reveal to you the truth of what was created and allow
you to create anew. 

<sup>2.28</sup> This state of union is what differentiated me from my
brothers and sisters at the time of my life on earth. Because my state
of consciousness, a state of consciousness we are calling
Christ-consciousness, allowed me to exist in union and relationship with
all, I could see my brothers and sisters “in Christ” or in their true
nature. I saw them in union and relationship, where they saw themselves
in separation. This ability to see in union and relationship is the
*shared* vision to which you are called. 

<sup>2.29</sup> You have lived with the vision of the separated self for
so long that you cannot imagine what *shared* vision will mean, and do
not yet recognize it when you experience it. This is why you can still
think of observance of what is as a game of make believe and feel that
you will have to trick yourself into believing that you see love where
there is cause for fear. You must remember that you are now called to
see without judgment. To see without judgment is to see truly. You need
not look for good or bad, but only need be steadily aware that you can
only see in one of two ways—with love or fear. 

<sup>2.30</sup> You expect yourself to still see with the eyes of
separation rather than with the shared vision of which I speak. You
expect to see bodies and events moving through your days as you have in
the past. And yet your vision has already changed, although you are not
aware of the extent of this change.  Realize now that you *have* come to
recognize unity. You do not any longer see each person and event as
separate, with no relation to the whole.  You *are* beginning to see the
connections that exist and this is the beginning. 

<sup>2.31</sup> Examine what you may have felt the onset of true vision
would mean.  Have you considered this question? Have you expected to see
in the same way but more lovingly? Have you thought you might begin to
recognize those who, like you, are joined with me in
Christ-consciousness? Have you suspected that you might see in ways
literally different? That you might see auras or halos, signs and clues
previously unseen? Have you included other senses in your idea of sight?
Have you thought your instincts will be sharpened and that you will know
with an inner knowing that will aid the sight of your eyes? 

<sup>2.32</sup> All of these things are possible. But true vision is
seeing relationship and union. It is the opposite of seeing with the
eyes and the attitude of separation. It is seeing with an expectation
first and foremost of revelation. It is believing that you exist in
relationship and union with all, and that each encounter is one of union
and relationship, and *purpose*—purpose that will be revealed to you
because you exist in union with the Source and Cause of revelation. 

<sup>2.33</sup> Seeing with the vision of Christ-consciousness is
already upon you.  You are in the process of learning what it means.
This Treatise is here to help you do so. Learning to see anew is the
precursor of learning to create anew.  Creating anew is the precursor of
the coming of the new world. Remember, only from a shared vision of what
is can you begin to produce unity and relationship *through* unity and
relationship. This is your purpose now, and this the curriculum to guide
you to the fulfillment of your purpose.

