---
treatise: "A Treatise On The New: The Fourth Treatise"
chapter: "12"
title: "Treatise 4, Chapter 12: A Prelude to The Dialogues"
---

<sup>12.1</sup> Welcome, my new brothers and sisters in Christ, to the
creation of the future through the sustainability of
Christ-consciousness. Today we join together to birth the new. 

<sup>12.2</sup> From this time on, I will respond to you through direct
communication or dialogue rather than through teaching. As with all new
means of doing anything, this dialogue must have a starting point. This
is it. 

<sup>12.3</sup> At this time, there is a gathering of pioneers of the
new already in existence. They are beginning to see that they learn as
one. They are beginning to see that their questions are the same. They
are beginning to see that they share in means not confined to the
physical senses. 

<sup>12.4</sup> This prelude will address them individually and
collectively, and as you join with them in unity, you will realize that
it also addresses you individually and as part of the collectivity of
the whole. This dialogue will, however, be ongoing, and this is your
invitation to participate in this dialogue. No matter where you are, no
matter what concerns you still hold within your heart, no matter what
questions are emanating from your mind, they will be met with a
response. 

<sup>12.5</sup> Two changes of enormous proportions are upon you. The
first is the end of learning, the ramifications of which will only
slowly occur to your mind and be surprising revelations there. The
second is the beginning of sharing in unity, a change that your heart
will gladly accept but that your mind, once again, will be continuously
surprised to encounter. 

<sup>12.6</sup> Take delight in these surprises. Laugh and be joyous.
You no longer have a need to figure things out. Surprises cannot be
figured out! They are meant to be joyous gifts being constantly
revealed. Gifts that need only be received and responded to.

<sup>12.7</sup> Once these dialogues are sustainable without need of the
written word, the written word will be less necessary. In the meantime,
let me explain why these written words are not the acts of an
intermediary and why they represent direct learning. 

<sup>12.8</sup> The simple and complete explanation of the
non-intermediary nature of this dialogue is that it exists in unity. It
is given and received in unity. Intermediary steps were needed only for
the separate state. All conditions that were intermediary in nature
during the time of learning, are, during the time of sharing, naturally
converted to direct experiences of sharing.

<sup>12.9</sup> Thus, if you have been religious, abandon not your
churches, for you will find within them now, direct experiences of
sharing. If you have found guidance and comfort in the written word,
abandon not the written word, for the written word will now elicit
direct experiences of sharing. If you have enjoyed learning through
gatherings of students, gather still, and experience sharing directly.
If a time arrives when you no longer feel drawn to these modes of
sharing, share anew in ever-wider configurations. 

<sup>12.10</sup> All you must remember now is that the time of learning
is past.  While you are still encountering concerns and questions, you
will be prone to continue to think of yourself as a learning being.
While these dialogues continue to address these same questions and
concerns, you will be prone to think of them as teaching dialogues and
to consider yourself still a student. Considering yourself thus is
simply a condition of the old for which you will need to be vigilant.
You will be again surprised, however, to find what an enormous
difference the release of this idea will make in your capacity to
express who you are.  As long as you continue to invite learning, you
will continue to invite the *conditions* of learning. These are the
conditions you have experienced throughout your lifetime and have
expressed a willingness to leave behind. Only you can leave these
conditions behind. The only way to do so is to, for a short while, be
vigilant of your thought patterns so that you eradicate the idea of
learning in separation and replace it with the idea of sharing in unity.
Learning is a condition of the separated self, which is why it is no
longer needed. You will not fully realize unity while you continue to
hang on to this condition of the separation. 

<sup>12.11</sup> Another thing that you will want to be vigilant of,
dear brothers and sisters, is the learned wisdom of the past. Let me
give you an example that relates to the state of rebellion that was
discussed within the text of this Treatise.

<sup>12.12</sup> This example arose from one of those already gathered
who was questioning the state of contentment. She quoted a learned
priest and scholar who spoke of how he knew, as soon as he was content
within the life of the monastery, that it was time to once again move
out into the world. What he was really saying was that he saw the
dawning of his contentment as the sign that one period of learning was
over and that it was time to move on to the next. During the time of
learning, this statement was consistent with learned wisdom. During the
new time of sharing, there is no “next phase” of learning for you to
move on to.  There is no reason for you not to exist in continual
contentment.  Continual contentment will not stunt your growth or
prevent you from sharing or from expressing yourself anew. 

<sup>12.13</sup> Is this not a good example of the *learned wisdom* that
needs to be left behind? But what of the questions it raises? Do you not
respond to the idea of continual contentment with doubt? Not only doubt
that it can be continual but with doubt that you would desire it to be?
These questions relate to our earlier discussion of temptations of the
human experience. Are you willing to leave them behind? Are you willing,
for instance, to leave behind the idea that contentment cannot and
*should* not last? That lasting contentment, like unto a lasting peace,
would somehow stunt your growth? Can you see that your idea of growth
was synonymous with your idea of learning? That you were always both
awaiting and dreading your next learning challenge? 

<sup>12.14</sup> Why was this so? You eagerly awaited each learning
challenge in the hopes that it would bring you to the state in which you
now abide!  You dreaded each learning challenge because you feared that
it would not bring you to this state and that you would continue to need
to learn, and to perhaps suffer from, the conditions of learning! 

<sup>12.15</sup> You have arrived! The long journey that brought you
here is over.  Grow not impatient or desirous of a return to journeying
before you begin to experience the joy of sharing and the new challenges
of creating the new! This will be joyous journeying and your challenges
will be joyous challenges! 

<sup>12.16</sup> The state of rebellion was the effect of the cause of
learned wisdom. It became part of the nature of the human experience by
becoming so consistent within you that it came, through the passing down
of the human experience, to be integral to your nature. Have you not
always been told and seen examples of man pushing against his limits?
Has not this pushing against limits been called progress? Have not even
the most devastating misuses of power attained through this rebellion
been seen retrospectively as having advanced the cause of man’s
evolution and society’s knowledge? 

<sup>12.17</sup> This is just a beginning point of your ability to see
what learned wisdom has wrought. This is a necessary end point of your
review of your experience here so that you do not continue to advance
learned wisdom.  Learned wisdom will tell you to work hard. Learned
wisdom will tell you that the strong survive, the mighty prevail, the
weak shall perish. I attempted to dislodge much of this learned wisdom
during my time on Earth and man is still puzzling over the meaning of my
words. The time for puzzlement is over. Pass on no more of the
prevailing learned wisdom. I told you once we would create a new
language and thus we shall! We are creators of the new and we must start
somewhere. Why not here? 

<sup>12.18</sup> Think and speak no more of the suffering of the past.
Spread the joyous news! Tell only joyous stories. Advance the idea of
joyous challenges that allow for all the creativity you have put into
challenges of the past but without the struggle. Let not the idea of
struggle take hold in the new.  Let not the idea of fear take hold in
the new. Let not the idea of judgment take hold in the new. Announce far
and wide freedom from the old ideas, the learned wisdom of old. What
could be more invigorating, more challenging, more stimulating to your
enrichment, than throwing out the old and beginning again? And doing so
without effort, without struggle. What could be more looked forward to
than the chance to create the new through sharing in unity and
relationship with your brothers and sisters in Christ? 

<sup>12.19</sup> I know you still have questions, dear brothers and
sisters. I know that you will experience times of not knowing how to
proceed. I know that you will occasionally have setbacks and choose the
conditions of learning instead of sharing in unity in order to realize
some bit of knowledge that you feel is necessary before you can go on.
But I ask you to try to remember to turn to the new rather than the old
each time you think you are experiencing uncertainty or lack. 

<sup>12.20</sup> The only thing that is going to hold you back from your
ability to sustain Christ-consciousness is doubt about yourself. You
must constantly remember that doubt about yourself is fear, and reject
the instinct, so engrained into your singular consciousness, to let
doubt of yourself take hold of you. Even though you are abiding now in
the state of Christ-consciousness, the *pattern* of the old thoughts
will continue until they are replaced by a new pattern. That self-doubt
arises in your thought patterns will not mean that you have cause for
self-doubt. You have no cause for self-doubt because you have no cause
for fear. To dwell in fear will end your ability to dwell within the
love that is Christ-consciousness. As there is no longer any cause for
self-doubt there are no *reasons* for self-doubt. Do not examine
yourself for reasons for self-doubt when it arises. The
self-centeredness of the final stage of learning is over. 

<sup>12.21</sup> Your “centeredness” must now be focused on sharing in
unity and relationship, and thus creating anew in unity and
relationship. Along with the creation of a new language, another
imperative creation with which to begin our new work is that of new
patterns. The patterns of old were patterns designed for the optimal
benefit of learning. These patterns were created by the one mind and
heart that you share in unity with God. The new patterns of sharing in
unity and relationship and thus creating unity and relationship are only
now being created by the one mind and heart that you share in unity with
God. You will be the co-creator of the new pattern of consciousness that
is sharing in unity and relationship, as you were once the co-creator of
the pattern of consciousness that was learning. 

<sup>12.22</sup> Again let me remind you that we are speaking of the
new. There has always been a state of consciousness that we are here
calling Christ-consciousness. There has never been a sustained
Christ-consciousness in form. The Christ-consciousness that has always
existed, a consciousness of what *is*, is an all-inclusive
consciousness, the consciousness of the embrace.  It is not a learned
state, as was the singular consciousness of the human form. It is your
innate consciousness, a consciousness far too vast to be learned but one
easily shared by all. 

<sup>12.23</sup> In other words, you, as a being of singular
consciousness, could learn the thought patterns of a singular
consciousness because it was a finite consciousness, a consciousness
with limits. You, as a being joined in Christ-consciousness, must share
this consciousness *in order* to know it.  It cannot be grasped by the
singular consciousness. You could think of this as something which, were
it integrated into the thought processes of the singular brain, would
cause brain damage, because it would cause an overload of information.
The singular consciousness would act like a computer with a full drive
and reject the information or be overcome by it if such were possible.
Such is not possible, because Christ-consciousness is not available to
the separated self.  Christ-consciousness is the consciousness of unity
for unity is what *is*.

<sup>12.24</sup> You now exist within a shared consciousness. The
pattern of a shared consciousness is one of sharing in unity and
relationship. There is no pattern within it for learning (which is
individual), for individual gain, or for individual accomplishment. 

<sup>12.25</sup> But realize, those of you who would mourn this as a
loss, that you have already achieved all that was possible to achieve as
an individual.  The purpose of individual learning was the return of
unity! Pause a moment here, and celebrate this feat of the personal
self! The personal self, through the self-centeredness of the final
stages of learning, has achieved the ultimate achievement possible! Let
yourself be grateful for the learning you have achieved. Celebrate this
graduation, this anointing, this passage. And leave it behind. Realize
that it has made you new. Rejoice and be glad and turn your attention to
the new. Attend to the dawning of the consciousness of unity. Realize
that it is a truly new state, a state that cannot be learned, a state
the awareness of which can only be revealed to you through unity and
relationship. 

<sup>12.26</sup> Realize this without fear, for I am with you. This is
akin to being stranded in a foreign land with none of the ways you
learned how to adapt in the past being of service to you. That is how
new this is—and more. But the difference is that you are not alone and
that you are not in a foreign land but returned to your home of origin.
What you cannot learn you can remember. What you cannot learn will
simply be known through sharing.

<sup>12.27</sup> It is the *way* in which you will come to remember and
share in unity that concerns you now and what we are speaking of when we
talk of patterns. There was a pattern to the process of learning that
was shared by all learners and inherent to your natures. The means were
different for each, but the pattern was the same. There was an overall
design that ensured optimal learning and that design was known to you in
the pattern of that design, a pattern that was part of the pattern of
your thoughts, even after the ego came to rule your thought system.
Without this pattern, the ego could have succeeded in becoming the ruler
of the personal self. Part of this design and pattern was the freedom of
free will. 

<sup>12.28</sup> Free will continues in the pattern of
Christ-consciousness.  Love continues. The individual or singular
consciousness that was appropriate to the time of learning does not
continue. Thus the new pattern is one of creation in relationship and
unity rather than learning. What this means will be revealed to you and
shared by all who abide within Christ-consciousness because you abide in
a consciousness of unity through your choice. 

<sup>12.29</sup> You do not have to choose to share, because you cannot
*not* share.  You do not have to continually choose unity, because you
have already chosen unity and abide there. You do, however, have to
refrain from choosing separation. You do have to refrain from choosing
learning and the conditions of learning. 

<sup>12.30</sup> What will help you to remain doubt-free and thus
fear-free and continually able to sustain Christ-consciousness, is
coming to know the new design, and the new patterns that reveal the
design. This new design, and the new patterns that will be helpful to
you in its sustainability, are what must be created through our sharing
in unity and be communicated through our continuing dialogues with one
another. 

<sup>12.31</sup> This is a prelude to but one form of these dialogues.
Sharing in unity is automatic. It is the nature of Christ-consciousness.
Once you have adapted to this nature you will realize that what is
communicated through our dialogues and those you share with your
brothers and sisters, is simply communication of what already is. This
will help you to adapt to the revelations that replace learning. This
will help you to adapt to the truth of a sharing you will have received
even before it is communicated through the means to which you are
accustomed. It will help us together to establish the new patterns by
which you and those who come after you, will more fully come to
awareness of all they have inherited and all it is within their power to
create. 

<sup>12.32</sup> I do not have the answers that would continue to make
of me a teacher and you a student. The answers to the elevation of the
personal self and the living of Christ-consciousness in form are yet to
be revealed and shared. This is the time that is before us, the time of
creation of the future, the time of the creation of a future not based
upon the past. 

<sup>12.33</sup> This time is before *us*. Because you are a being still
existing in form, you still exist in the realm of time and space. Yet
time and space no longer separate us, and the creation of the design or
pattern that reveals our lack of separation is part of the creation that
is before *us*. It will be mutually decided through the coming
revelations and our responses to the revelations of the new.

<sup>12.34</sup> Creation of the new has begun. We are an interactive
part of this creative act of a loving Creator. Creation is a dialogue.
Creation—which is God and us in unity—will respond to our responses.
Will respond to what we envision, imagine and desire. Creation of the
new could not begin without you. Your willingness for the new, a
willingness that included the leaving behind of the old, a willingness
that included the leaving behind of fear and judgment and a separate
will, was necessary to begin creation of the new. Your former
willingness to accept the old but kept creation’s power harnessed to the
old. Does this not make perfect sense when you realize that creation,
like God, is not “other than” who you are? How could creation proceed on
to the new without you?

<sup>12.35</sup> What will the future hold? It is up to us dear brothers
and sisters. It is up to us acting as one body, one mind, one heart. It
is up to us creating as one body, one mind, one heart. Because it is the
new future of a new form joined in unity and relationship, the only
guarantees that are known to us is that it will be a future of love, a
future without fear, a future with unlimited freedom. For what more
could we ask? And what more could be asked of us? 

<sup>12.36</sup> Make no mistake that what is asked of us is everything.
What is asked is our total willingness to abandon the old, our total
willingness to embrace the new. But also make no mistake that what is
given to us is everything.  All the power of creation is released onto
us. Let us begin.

