---
treatise: "A Treatise On The New: The Fourth Treatise"
chapter: "3"
title: "Treatise 4, Chapter 3: Natural Vision"
---

<sup>3.1</sup> Observation is an extension of the embrace that in turn
makes the embrace observable. The embrace is not an action so much as a
state of being. Awareness of the embrace comes from the vision of which
I have just begun to speak. 

<sup>3.2</sup> Observation and vision are closely linked but not the
same.  Observation has to do with the elevation of the personal self.
Vision has to do with what cannot be elevated. Vision has to do with the
divine pattern, the unity that binds all living things.  Observation is
the means of seeing this binding pattern in physical form. 

<sup>3.3</sup> The personal self is still in need of being
elevated—elevated to its original nature—by its original nature or
intent. The devotion of the observant will return you to your original
purpose. The vision of Christ-consciousness will take you beyond it. 

<sup>3.4</sup> Original intent has everything to do with the nature of
things for original intent is synonymous with cause. The original intent
of this chosen experience was the expression of the Self of love in
observable form. This original intent or cause formed the true nature of
the personal self capable of being observed in relationship. The
displacement of the original intent, while it did not change the
original cause, formed a false nature for the personal self. This
displacement of the original intent can be simply stated as the
displacement of love with fear. It is as simple as that. Yet the way in
which each of you have interpreted this displacement has come to seem
quite complex. 

<sup>3.5</sup> You may not feel that you have ever intended to live in
fear. But the displacement of the original intent was so complete that
each life has begun with fear and proceeded from this beginning
continually reacting to fear. While the original intent remained within
you and caused you to attempt to express a Self of love despite your
fear, fear has thwarted your every effort and caused the very effort
that has continued the cycle of fear. To have to *try* to be who you are
and to express who you are is the result of the displacement of the
nature of love with the nature of fear. What we now are about is
reversing this displacement and returning you to your true nature. 

<sup>3.6</sup> For every being there is a *natural state of being* that
is joyful, effortless, and full of love. For every being existing in
time there is also an *unnatural state of being*. Both states of
being—the natural and the unnatural—exist in relationship. While
relationship is what has kept you forever unable to be separate and
alone, relationship is also what has kept you seemingly forever unable
to return to your natural state of being. The fear that was birthed
along with the erroneously inherited idea that it was your nature to be
separate and alone and thus fearful, made relationships fearful as well.
Trust became something to be earned.  Even the most loving parent, like
unto your most loving image of God, having brought a child into a
fearful world, became subject to the tests of time. Thus did the world
become a world of effort with all things in it and beyond it, including
God, weighed and balanced against the idea of fear. 

<sup>3.7</sup> Now, as we reverse this set of circumstances, and replace
the world of fear with a world of love, there can be no more weighing of
love against fear. God did not create fear and will not be judged by it.
All judgment is the cause of fear and this effort to weigh love’s
strength against fear’s veracity. While you chose to believe and live in
a world the nature of which was fear, you could not know God. You could
not know God because you judged God from within the nature of fear,
believing it to be your natural state. 

<sup>3.8</sup> As the natural state of love is returned to you, judgment
falls away because vision will arise. With the onset of the vision of
love, many of you will make one final judgment in which you find
everything to be good and full of love. Once all has been judged with
the vision of love, judgment is over naturally for it has served its
purpose. This is the final judgment. 

<sup>3.9</sup> The vision that will arise in you now is not new. It is
your natural vision, the vision of love. What is new is the elevation of
the personal self that will be caused by the return of your natural
state of love.  This is where observation comes in. 

<sup>3.10</sup> Vision will allow you to see the nature of the world and
all that exists within it truly.  Observation will allow you to elevate
the personal self to its rightful place within the nature of a world of
love. 

<sup>3.11</sup> Vision is the natural means of knowing of all who were
created in love. Observation is the natural means of sharing what is
known in physical form. 

<sup>3.12</sup> The physical form is not the natural or original form of
the created. Vision is the *means* by which the original nature of the
created can once again be known. Observation is the *means* by which the
original nature of the created can newly be seen in physical form. Once
the original nature of the created becomes observable in physical form,
physical form will surpass what it once was and become the new nature of
the created. There is no reason why the original nature of your being
cannot become a being the nature of which is form if you so choose it to
be. There is a reason why the original nature of your being cannot exist
in a form unnatural to love. A form whose nature is fear cannot house
the creation of love.

<sup>3.13</sup> Man has striven since the beginning of time to be done
with the separated state of a being of form, and at the same time to
hang on to life; not realizing that what exists in form does not have to
be separate and alone; not realizing that what lives does not have to
die.  That the nature of form can change. That the nature of matter is
one of change. That the nature, even of form, once returned to its
natural state of love, is one of unity and everlasting life. 

<sup>3.14</sup> The idea of everlasting life in form has seemed a curse
to some, a miracle to others. Death comes as destruction to some, as new
life to others.  Either way is but your choice. Your attachment to life
has kept you alive in form. Your attachment to death has kept your form
subject to the cycle of decay and rebirth. There is another alternative. 

<sup>3.15</sup> The promise of life-everlasting was not an empty
promise. It is a promise that has been fulfilled. It is you who have
chosen the means.  Now a new choice is before you.

