---
treatise: "A Treatise On The New: The Fourth Treatise"
chapter: "7"
title: "Treatise 4, Chapter 7: An End to Learning"
---

<sup>7.1</sup> Christ-consciousness will be temporary or sustainable
depending on your ability to refrain from judgment. What *is* flows from
Love and knows not judgment. All that you envision, imagine, desire with
love *must* be without judgment or it will be false envisioning, false
imagining, false desire. This simply means *false*, or not consistent
with the truth. It does not mean wrong or bad and is itself no cause for
judgment. It is simply an alternative that will draw you out of
Christ-consciousness and not allow it to be sustainable. 

<sup>7.2</sup> That you are living in the time of Christ does not mean
that you will automatically realize Christ-consciousness, just as living
in the time of the Holy Spirit did not mean that you would automatically
realize the consciousness of the spirit that was your intermediary. But
just as during the time of the Holy Spirit, your understanding of your
Self and God grew through the indirect means that were available to you,
during the time of Christ, your understanding of your Self and God
cannot help but grow through the direct and observable means now
available. Just as in the time of the Holy Spirit the spirit was
available to all as intermediary, during the time of Christ,
Christ-consciousness is available to all. 

<sup>7.3</sup> Those of you who have acquired Christ-consciousness and
are now learning the vision of Christ-consciousness must realize the
many choices that will seem to lie before you and your brothers and
sisters in this time. The understanding of the unity that creates and
sustains all living things will now be as close to the surface of
consciousness as was, during the time of the Holy Spirit, the
understanding that man is imbued with spirit. People, both religious and
non-religious, those who consider themselves spiritual and those who
consider themselves pragmatists, will hold this understanding within
their grasp. Many will be surprised by experiences of unity and know not
what to make of them.  Those who attempt to figure them out will come
ever closer to the truth by means of science, technology, and even art
and literature. Those who allow themselves to experience revelation will
enter Christ-consciousness.

<sup>7.4</sup> Those who sustain Christ-consciousness will abide within
it free of judgment. They will not seek to create their version of a
perfect world and to force it upon others, but will abide within the
perfect world that is in the vision of Christ-consciousness. This
perfect world will be observable to them and in them. It will be
revealed to them and through them. It will be revealed to them through
what they can envision, imagine and desire without judgment. It will not
take the effort of their bodies, but the freedom of a consciousness
joined in unity, a consciousness able to envision, imagine and desire
without judgment and without fear. 

<sup>7.5</sup> This is why all fear, including the fear of death, needs
to be removed from you despite the radical sounding nature of
life-everlasting. You cannot sustain Christ-consciousness while fear
remains in you, just as you cannot sustain Christ-consciousness while
judgment remains in you. Why? Because it is not in the nature of Christ,
it is not in the nature of the Christ-Self to know fear or judgment.
What we are speaking of is abiding in your natural state. Your natural
state is one free of fear and judgment. This is all that makes up the
difference between your natural state and your unnatural state. As your
natural state returns to you through a heart and mind joined in unity,
your body too will exist or abide within this natural state. It cannot
help but do so, as it, just like your heart, exists in the state or
reality in which you think you are. The only thing that has created an
unreal reality for your heart and body has been the inability of the
mind to join the truth with your conscious awareness. While your mind
did not accept the truth of your identity or the reality of love without
fear, it existed in a reality of fear and judgment, and bound heart and
body to this reality. Your heart has now heard the appeal of this Course
and worked with your mind to bring about this acceptance of the truth, a
truth your heart has always known but has been unable to free you to
accept without the mind’s cooperation. 

<sup>7.6</sup> The mind, once released from the ego’s thought system,
has but to relearn the thought system of the truth. Your mind, heart,
and body have joined in alignment to bring this learning about. They now
exist in harmony. Your mind and heart in union have brought harmony to
your body.  Sustaining this harmony will keep your body in perfect
health, even while the manner of this perfection of your health will
remain one of many options. 

<sup>7.7</sup> You will realize that what *is* is optimal to your
learning. But you will also realize that an end to your learning is in
sight.  Christ-consciousness and the ability to know what *is*, once it
has reached a state of sustainability in you, ends your need for
learning and thus ends the conditions of learning. In other words, being
in harmony with poor health and learning the lesson that it has come to
impart to you, will return you to good health. Your poor health is no
cause for judgment, as it is the perfect health, now, in the past, and
in the future, to bring you the lessons you would learn in order to
return you to your Self and the unity of Christ-consciousness. The same
is true of all conditions of all learning everywhere. The conditions are
perfect for optimal learning. This is the nature of the universe. These
conditions are perfect not only for individual learning, but for shared
learning, learning in community and learning as a species. 

<sup>7.8</sup> But let me again emphasize that the conditions of
learning will be no longer needed once learning has occurred. The
student no longer needs to attend school once the desired curriculum is
learned, *except* through their own choice.  Again let me remind you
that no choice is wrong. Some will choose to continue to learn through
the full variety of the human experience even after it is unnecessary.
Why? Because it is a choice, pure and simple.  But because it is an
educated choice, an enlightened choice, a free choice due to the
learning that has already occurred, the choice will be one guided by
love and thus be a joyous choice and ensure a joyous life.  These
choices will *change* the world.

<sup>7.9</sup> But the choice many of you will make—the choice to move
from learning to creating—will *create a new world*.

