---
treatise: "A Treatise On The New: The Fourth Treatise"
chapter: "6"
title: "Treatise 4, Chapter 6: A New Choice"
---

<sup>6.1</sup> Now I ask you to consider the part you play in the
creation of this all-encompassing consciousness. Your state of
consciousness, be you alive or dead, asleep or awake, literally or
figuratively, is a *part* of the consciousness that is
Christ-consciousness. This is why you hear differing reports of the
afterlife from those who have experienced temporary death. It is why you
hear differing words and scenarios attributed to me and other
life-giving spirits, both historically and currently. What you envision,
imagine, desire, hold as being possible, *is* possible, because you make
it so. It is your interaction, both individually and collectively with
the consciousness that is *us*, that creates probable futures rather
than guaranteed futures. 

<sup>6.2</sup> The only guarantee I can offer you is the guarantee that
you are who <sup>I</sup> say you are, and that I speak the truth
concerning your identity and inheritance. What you choose to do with
this knowledge is still up to you. What you choose to create with this
knowledge is still up to you.

<sup>6.3</sup> Those who believe that only some will be chosen can
create a scenario in which it appears that some are chosen and some are
not.  Those who believe that life-everlasting includes life on other
worlds can create a scenario in which it appears that some live on one
world and some on another. But I say to you that any scenario that
separates my brothers and sisters from one another and the one
life-giving energy that unites us all will but continue life as it has
been but in different form. The realization of unity is the binding
realization that will return all, as one body, to the natural state of
Christ-consciousness. 

<sup>6.4</sup> In this time of Christ, this time of direct revelation
and direct sharing, the probable future you imagine, envision, desire,
will be what you create.  This is the power of the devotion of the
observant. A *shared* vision of unity and a return of *all* to the state
natural to all is what I ask you to imagine, envision and desire. 

<sup>6.5</sup> I ask you to share a vision of what *is*, the very vision
of what *is* that *is* Christ-consciousness. It is a vision of the
perfection of creation. It is a vision of unity and relationship in
harmony. It excludes no one and no one’s choice and no one’s vision.
Your brothers and sisters who do not choose their natural state still
are who they are and holy as yourself. Your brothers and sisters who
choose alternative visions are still who they are and holy as yourself.
All choices are forever encompassed by the embrace. There is no wrong
choice. No one is excluded. All are chosen. 

<sup>6.6</sup> There is room in the universe, dear brothers and sisters,
for everyone’s choice. I call you to a new choice, but not to
intolerance of those who are not ready to make it. I call you to a new
choice with the full realization that your choice alone will affect
millions of your brothers and sisters, as long as—and this is a crucial
*as long as*—you do not give in to ideas of separation and disunity. 

<sup>6.7</sup> Christ-consciousness is not a static state of beliefs any
more than singular consciousness is.  Christ-consciousness is
consciousness of what *is*. While consciousness of what *is* leaves not
the room for error that perception leaves, it leaves open room for
creation. In each moment, what *is*, while still existing in the one
truth of God’s law of love, can find many expressions. You can exist in
Christ-consciousness, as have many others of the past, and through your
existence in Christ-consciousness, affect much with what you envision,
imagine and desire, in love, without changing the world and the nature
of the human being any more than have those who have come before. The
changes those who have existed in Christ-consciousness have wrought have
been great, but they did not sustain Christ-consciousness, primarily
because they were unable to share Christ-consciousness directly due to
individual and collective choice. 

<sup>6.8</sup> You have the unequalled opportunity now, because you
exist in the Time of Christ, to directly share Christ-consciousness and
thus sustain Christ-consciousness. You can pass on the inheritance you
accept in this fullness of time. In this time of unity, dedicate all
thought to unity.  Accept no separation. Accept all choices. Thus are
all chosen in the fullness of time.

