---
chapter: "10"
title: "Chapter 10: Use and Understanding"
---

<sup>10.1</sup> First let us consider what it is the body would use.
Although you feel slave to it and under the weight of its control, who
is the you it would control? How can it make you do other than you
choose to do? Learn this lesson well, for herein lies the cure to all
disease and the hope of all healing. While the body seems to tell you
what you feel and bid you act in accordance with its feelings, how can
this be so? The body by itself is neutral. But as long as you attribute
the body with bringing you pleasure, the body will bring you pain as
well. You cannot choose one without the other, because the choice is the
same. The body is a tool made for your use in maintaining the illusion
of your separation.  That it has seeming power can only be because you
think you put your power there. If this were true, much power indeed
would it wield. But what you have made cannot be invested with the power
of creation without your joining with it. How, you think, could you be
more linked with anything than you are with your own body? If you are
not even joined with this presence that you call your home, how can you
be expected to join with others? 

<sup>10.2</sup> Now we must return to the concept of relationship, for
the thought of bodies joined in union closer than the union that you
feel with the body you call your own is indeed ridiculous. Joining
happens in relationship, not in physical form. Joining is not the
obliteration of one thing to make another—joining makes each one whole,
and in this wholeness one with all. This union has never really ceased
to be, but as long as you do not realize that it exists its benefits are
unavailable to you. As much as I would like it to be so, my telling you
the truth of your existence is not enough of itself to make you aware of
what you have for so long hidden from yourself. I can merely tell you
where to look, and save you countless years of seeking where the truth
is not, if you will but seek where I bid you find. 

<sup>10.3</sup> There are aspects of what I am telling you that you
readily embrace and others that you do not understand and would wait
awhile before implementing. What you truly do not understand is
wholeness. All things exist in wholeness, including the thought system
that you made to protect the illusion you hold so dear. Your thought
system is completely alien to the truth, but completely consistent as a
system. You cannot abandon one tenet and retain another because by
retaining part you retain all. This will lead to seeming failure to
learn what I would have you learn. What God would have me teach, you
cannot fail to learn, but neither can you learn of it in parts. The
thought system of truth is as wholly consistent as the thought system of
illusion, and you cannot take what you will and leave the rest. Thus we
will continue to point out the differences in the two thought systems so
that your ideas can begin to change, until finally your heart takes over
and makes the one choice you are bound to make.  Your heart—not to be
confused with the pump that runs the body, but identified as the center
of yourself—has no thought system separate from your own and must exist
in the reality where you think you are.  

<sup>10.4</sup> The beginning of all transformation is at the source,
and this is as true of illusion as of the truth. You see your body as
your self, and your self as “source” of all that you have done and felt
in all your days upon this earth. Yet your real Source is at the center
of your Self, the altar to your Creator, the Self you share in unity
with Christ. Christ is the “part” of God that resides in you, not in
separation but in the eternal wholeness in which God and you together
exist in truth. 

<sup>10.5</sup> For those of you who have been journeying long, as well
as those of you just beginning, this abandonment of the body as your
home and source of all you are is the greatest hurdle to overcome. As
you observe the body and dare to think of life without it, you again and
again encounter its reality. When its awareness begins to leave you is
just when you may be beset by headaches, back pain, and other seeming
maladies. This is the separated self that you have made calling you back
to the body to prove to you that it is insurmountable. Many people at
this point try to think these maladies away, and when they do not
succeed they see this as further evidence of their entrenchment in the
body. Beware all attempts to think the body away and to think miracles
into existence. This desire merely shows you know not the source of
healing and are not ready to be healed. 

<sup>10.6</sup> That you are not ready yet does not mean you will not be
ready, just as having lost something does not mean it no longer exists.
Yet your separated self would cite all evidence of its failure to be
other than separate and be quick to point out to you the impossibility
of being other than what you are—a body. This is the “fact” it whispers
constantly in your ear, the lie that it would have you believe makes all
else you would learn here as impossible as this. You listen to this
voice because it has been your constant companion and teacher in your
separation, not realizing that what it has taught you is to be separate.
Be warned that it will constantly try to interfere as long as you place
any merit in what it tells you. 

<sup>10.7</sup> Think of another, a teacher or a parent, whose “voice”
you hear as you go through your days. Whether you want to hear this
voice or not, whether this voice was wise or foolish, the very
repetition of this voice keeps it in your memory. This may be the voice
that says, “Stand up straight,” or “You’re special,” or “You will never
amount to anything.” Many of you may have used therapy to still the
negative messages that you hear, and after much effort succeeded at
replacing what was negative with messages of a more positive nature. And
these are but messages of an outside source! Your own thoughts are much
more persistent and insistent than these. They have been with you longer
and more constantly. Vigilance is needed to dislodge them. 

<sup>10.8</sup> I tell you this not to discourage you, but to encourage
you not to give up. Your purpose now is the holiest possible and all of
heaven is with you. All that is needed is your continuing willingness.
All that can cause you to fail is giving up. I give you these examples
that will make you say, “It will not be easy,” but I tell you neither
will it be hard if you but remember this: your willingness is all that
is needed.  When your separated self whispers to you, “Your body is but
a fact,” all you need tell yourself is, “I am still willing to believe
otherwise.” 

<sup>10.9</sup> Be aware also of your desire for reward. As you feel
yourself becoming closer to God and your true Self, as you gain more
awareness of yourself as a “good” person and one trying to be better
still, you will begin to look for your rewards. Later you will look back
upon this time and smile and laugh out loud at the innocence of these
desires that but reveal that you stand merely at the beginning of the
curriculum. To want a reward for goodness, for trying harder, for being
closer to God than your brother or sister, are all desires of your
separated self wanting something for itself and all its effort. This is
but a stage you will pass through, though some may linger long here. You
will stay until you realize that all are good and that you cannot earn
more of God’s good graces than your brother. You will stay until you
realize that God has given everything already to everyone. 

<sup>10.10</sup> Again but state your willingness. A willingness to
believe that you have everything you need despite the “fact” that it
does not seem so. Your willingness is all that is needed to move you
through this stage and to the next. Be encouraged rather than
discouraged that God does not grant all your desires here. For these are
not yet your true desires, and the rewards you would choose here are as
dust to those you will become aware of as you proceed. 

<sup>10.11</sup> Let us talk a moment here of miracles. Simply stated,
miracles are a natural consequence of joining. Magic is your attempt to
do miracles *on your own*. In the early stages of your learning, you
will be tempted to play a game of make believe. You will not believe
that you are not your body, but you would make believe that you are not.
You may then be tempted to believe that because you are pretending you
are not a body, you can pretend you do not feel the pain of a headache
or the cold of a winter day, and this pretending may even make you feel
a little less pain or a little less cold. But this attempt to fool
yourself is welcomed by your separated self who knows pretending will
not make it so. 

<sup>10.12</sup> These attempts to fool yourself are based on your lack
of understanding rather than your lack of belief. You would not still be
reading if you believed you were your body and that alone.  Long have
you known that there is more to you than flesh and bones.  Belief is not
your problem. Understanding is. While you believe in God, you do not
understand God. While you believe in me, you do not understand how these
words have come from me. While you believe in heaven and an afterlife,
you do not understand what or where they are.  And to believe in
something that you do not understand makes you feel peculiar at the
least and delusional at the worst. You want to believe and so you
believe. But you also want to be “right” about what you believe. The
convenient thing about your belief in God, in me, in heaven and in an
afterlife is that you do not think you will be proven wrong here. If you
are wrong, you will merely rot away after you have died and no one will
know how wrong you were! If you are wrong, at least you believed in
something that brought you comfort and in the end did you no harm. 

<sup>10.13</sup> This is not as easily said about the concept of not
being separate, however. The only thing you find really difficult to
believe is that you are in union with your brothers and sisters, right
now, today. To believe in God without understanding God is one thing. To
believe in your union with your neighbor without understanding either
union or your neighbor is something else. This belief will not
necessarily bring you comfort or do you no harm. What if you believe in
the goodness of your neighbor and that belief is unwarranted?
unwarranted? What if you are trusting and find that trust to be
misplaced? What if you are simply naïve and are taken for a fool? What
if you are wrong? 

<sup>10.14</sup> A similar fear strikes your heart when you consider
giving up your belief in the body. To believe you are not your body
while you walk around within it is something quite different than
believing in God.  Here all the proof available would say that you are
wrong. All the proof of your eyes and ears, as well as that of science,
would say you are your body. Even history would seem to prove this fact
as you look back and say even Jesus died before he could rise again as
spirit. 

<sup>10.15</sup> I am here to teach you once again because I was the
example life.  Do you believe that when I walked the earth I was a body,
or do you believe that I was the Son of God before I was born into human
form, during the time I existed in human form, and after I rose again?
This is rightly called the mystery of faith: Christ has died, Christ has
risen, Christ will come again. What is missing from this recitation?
Christ was born. Nowhere in the mystery of faith is it stated that
Christ became a body. 

<sup>10.16</sup> You have not been told that the body does not exist,
only that it is not you. Like all tools you made, it is illusion because
you have no need of tools. But while you believe you do, it is quite
real to you. To give up the body entirely is a choice you need not make.
As your learning advances you will see that this is possible, but there
may be reasons not to choose this. At this point, however, all that is
asked is that your body is seen as what it is—both in terms of what you
made it for and in terms of the way in which you can now be guided to
use it for the benefit of all. 

<sup>10.17</sup> The choice for many has seemed to be “Would you rather
be right or happy?” Only the ego would choose being right over
happiness. As you observe your body, also observe its actions in terms
of the choices it makes. Ask yourself, “What choice may have led to this
situation or event?” For choice is always involved *before* the fact.
Nothing happens to the Son of God by accident. This observation will
help to put the responsibility of your life back into your hands, where
it belongs. You are not helpless, nor are you at the whim of forces
beyond your control.  The only force beyond your control is your own
mind, and this need not be. When you begin to ask yourself, What choice
might lead to happiness instead of this, you will begin to see a
difference in your body’s response to what appear to be external events,
and then a change in the external events themselves. 

<sup>10.18</sup> Your mind might still prefer to be right rather than
happy, so it is important that you let your heart lead in making this
new choice.  When you find yourself in a situation you do not like,
again offer your willingness to find some happiness within it. These
instructions to your heart will begin to make a difference to your state
of mind. 

<sup>10.19</sup> What you would call your state of mind is more like a
general atmosphere, an ambiance, a mood—and this setting is determined
with your heart. The thoughts of your separated self care little for
such as this and would call such concerns irrelevant to its well-being.
Its survival *as it is* is its only concern. This is not just concern
for needs such as food and shelter, but for survival of the thought
system of the separated self. Happiness is not a priority here, but
being right is quite important to it. It would prefer to be serious and
heavy-hearted rather than light-hearted and gay. Being serious about
life is a major strategy of the separated self, which recognizes its own
seriousness as necessary to maintain its separation. Joy is truly the
greatest threat to the separated self, for it comes from union and
reinforces union’s appeal at the expense of the appeal of separation. 

<sup>10.20</sup> You do not realize how quickly the separated self
rushes in to sabotage all movement away from separation and toward
union. Many of you have recognized that you seem to minimize your
chances for happiness and maximize your chances for unhappiness through
the choices you would make. You look back longingly at times of
happiness and wonder what went wrong and why you could not maintain that
happy state. There might be many practical reasons to cite for your
happiness’ demise, but in the loneliness that comes with its loss you
will wonder, at least briefly, why the choice for practicality needed to
be made. Yet if the separated self can look back and see that it chose
being right over being happy, it will congratulate itself despite its
unhappiness and say, “I did the right thing.” It will see itself as
victor over the foolish dreams of happiness and say how glad it is that
it came to its senses before it was too late. 

<sup>10.21</sup> Each of you is aware of a threshold you would cross
that leaves no route open for return.  That threshold is often a
happiness so fulfilling that once you have experienced it you say, “I
will take this despair no more.” For others this threshold is the
opposite, an experience of pain so great that they would rather die than
continue on in such a way. Addicts too but choose a different threshold
wherein after experiencing the oblivion of the separated self through
drugs, alcohol, or even constant work or shopping, they refuse to return
to the separated self’s reality. If they cannot leave it, they will
block it out. Some, at this threshold, turn back. They deny themselves
the joy or the pain or the oblivion that would make return impossible
and count themselves lucky for not going to the place from which change
would become inevitable. 

<sup>10.22</sup> The separated self is so ensconced in fear that the
known fears of its existence seem preferable to the unknown fears of any
other kind of existence. That an option could be chosen that leaves no
room for fear at all does not occur to it, for the absence of fear is
something it has never known.

<sup>10.23</sup> If the body is the surface aspect of your existence and
fear lies beneath the surface, see the advantage of this exercise: Place
your body out in front of yourself where you can be its silent observer.
As you watch your hands go about their work or the shadow form on the
ground as you walk to and fro, you will be learning the only separation
that can be useful to you. 

<sup>10.24</sup> Your first realization of significance will be that all
you hear does not come through your ears. You will find that you are
full of thoughts—thoughts *about* your body, the same kind of thoughts
you might have of someone else’s body. The difference will be that these
thoughts will not seem to have originated in your head. You may realize
for the first time or in a different way that you have always heard your
thoughts without the benefit of your ears. You may be saying now, “Of
course that is the way we hear our thoughts—it is the nature of
thought.” But have you ever before considered the nature of your
thoughts, or have you merely taken them for granted? 

<sup>10.25</sup> Thoughts are not seen nor heard and yet they are with
you constantly, and never more so than as you conduct your experiment in
detachment from the body.  This is why we conduct this experiment.
Whether you term yourself successful or a hopeless failure at conducting
this experiment, you will realize anew that your thoughts more
accurately define who you are than your body does. Whether they wander
aimlessly or are quite focused, your thoughts are more the source of all
you are and all you do than is the body you observe. 

<sup>10.26</sup> You may laugh at yourself for taking part in this silly
experiment, but you will realize the desire to laugh at yourself is
quite genuine and not conceived from meanness. There will be a happier
self who seems to think this game is rather fun, and who is not at all
concerned with the game’s success. This laughter too, as well as the
sense of fun that prompted it, will come without the body’s
participation. 

<sup>10.27</sup> You will soon develop an ability to see without your
body’s eyes.  This, too, will seem like a silly game at first, a trick
of your imagination. You will, at first, observe only that which you can
“see”— your arms and legs, your shadow falling as you walk—but more and
more you will come to see the body as a whole. You will see it from
behind as you follow it about its day, without, at first, even being
aware that this is happening. And you will find that as you observe, you
are more aware of your surroundings, and more aware that your body is
part of everything that is happening. There is your body and six more
crossing the street. There is your body sitting at a desk in a building
with many others. You will realize how seldom before you were aware of
the street you walked down, of the buildings it traveled between, of the
open sky above, of all the “others” traveling it with you. You will feel
more a part of everything rather than less, and be surprised by this
feeling. 

<sup>10.28</sup> Keep going now for this is but a beginning. Experiment,
just for the fun of it, without allowing room for discouragement. This
is not a test and you cannot fail. You are merely playing. Play at
observing yourself from above. Can you look “down” upon yourself? And
can you skip along and get in front to see your body coming toward you?

<sup>10.29</sup> This body that you claim to be your “self” is but a
form—how can it be that you can see it not? 

<sup>10.30</sup> What you will be feeling as you proceed is the feeling
of the tunnel vision of the separated self giving way to the expanded
vision of the unified Self. As you *feel* this happening, you will begin
to be aware of feelings too that are not bound to the body.  Like the
thoughts you neither see nor hear with your body’s eyes or ears, these
feelings too will not depend upon your body’s senses.

<sup>10.31</sup> You will find quite a bit of resistance to this
experiment. You will find you are too serious to play this game and that
you have better things to do. Yet as much as you resist, the idea has
been planted and you will find yourself, at times that seem to be
“against your will,” participating in it despite your determination not
to do so. Once you begin to feel the effects of the experiment you will
also encounter fear, especially if you take the game too seriously.
There will be times when you will not want to laugh when the urge to do
so comes upon you, and other times that after the slightest moment of
expanded vision you will welcome back your tunnel vision with gratitude.
You will feel relieved that your feet still touch the ground and that
the boundary of your body is still intact. But you will remember the
urge to laugh gently at yourself and the expanded vision as well. You
will remember that for a moment your body did not seem to be a boundary
that kept you contained within its limitations. Then you will remember
that this is but a Course in remembering and that memory is the language
of the heart. 

<sup>10.32</sup> Many of you will rebel here thinking this is not what
you signed on for. You just want to read about this Course, perhaps, and
not be required to take it. You will want to keep it theoretical and not
apply it. You will ask for the information, and say you would really
rather not have the experience. You wanted but the travelers’ guide and
not the actual journey. This is what too many of you sought, and many of
you still resist realizing that you got more than you bargained for. A
door has been reached, a threshold crossed. What your mind still would
deny your heart cannot. A tiny glimmering of memory has returned to you
and will not leave you to the chaos you seem to prefer. It will keep
calling you to acknowledge it and let it grow. It will tug at your heart
in the most gentle of ways. Its whisper will be heard within your
thoughts. Its melody will play within your mind. “Come back, come back,”
it will say to you. “Come home, come home,” it will sing. You will know
there is a place within yourself where you are missed and longed for and
safe and loved. A little peace has been made room for in the house of
your insanity.

