---
chapter: "25"
title: "Chapter 25: Devotion as a Type of Participation"
---

<sup>25.1</sup> To devote oneself to an objective is a vow to
accomplish. To be devoted is to be prayerful. As we said in the
beginning, to pray is to ask for all to be included in what you do.
Devotion is thus our first lesson in learning how to be engaged in life
during the time of tenderness. 

<sup>25.2</sup> Devotion is the outcome of love and in this instance is
an action word, a verb, a means of serving and being served by love.
Devotion is a particular type of participation. It cannot be faked. But
it can be practiced. 

<sup>25.3</sup> You, dear children, have faked your way through much of
life. You have faked confidence when you are uncertain, interest where
you feel indifference, knowledge of things about which you know nothing.
But those who have tried to fake love cannot do it. The same is true of
devotion, because there is no real devotion without love.

<sup>25.4</sup> Love cannot be faked because you know love. Because you
know it, imitations of love are immediately felt. You may choose to deny
the feeling, but you cannot prevent it from occurring. You can attempt
to earn the love of those from whom you desire it, you can attempt to
buy it, change for it, or capture it. This you cannot do. Yet, love is
always present. Let us spend a moment considering this contradiction.

<sup>25.5</sup> How can love always be present when you can undeniably
feel each and every absence of love? The problem is in the perceiver
rather than the perceived. Each time you feel a lack of love, it comes
from within yourself. This lack of love, or “faked” love of which you
cannot help but be aware, is a signal to you that you want something.
When you become aware that you want something, you are also becoming
aware that you feel you lack something. All feelings of lack are
synonymous with feelings of fear. Where there is fear, love is hidden.
Love is rejected when a choice for fear is made. You cannot be without
love, but you can reject love. When you reject love, it is hidden from
you, because receiving completes giving. Each of your brothers and
sisters are love inviolate. What each gives is incomplete until it is
received. 

<sup>25.6</sup> When you feel a lack of love in others, you have
projected your fear onto them. Only when you cease to do this will you
feel true devotion.

<sup>25.7</sup> When you feel lack of love, you feel as if the “other”
gives you nothing. Yet it is your lack of ability to receive that causes
this feeling. The practice of devotion is a means by which you can
purify your engagement with life and all you encounter within it.
Devotion is synonymous with true service. True service does not look for
what another has to give or what another has that you might use. True
service recognizes God’s law of giving and receiving, and the practice
of devotion is, in effect, the practice of allowing giving and receiving
to be one. It is, during the time of tenderness, a true practice that,
like vigilance, is a means to a desired end. You must practice
recognizing your feelings of lack of love, and realize these feelings
come from your inability to receive. Do this practice until it is no
longer needed.

<sup>25.8</sup> Devotion is inclusive. It implies a subject and an
object: One who is devoted and one who is an object of devotion. While
we are moving away from subject/object relationships to the relationship
of unity, the idea of one who is devoted, and of those for whom devotion
is practiced, is useful during the time of tenderness. It will lead to
the understanding of oneness as completion, an understanding of giving
and receiving as one. 

<sup>25.9</sup> Devotion leads to harmony through action. This is
possible for you now only if you have integrated the most basic teaching
of this Course and no longer feel duped by life. All of your contests of
will are supported by your contention that you have been misled. It is
as if you have paid for your ticket, arrived for the concert, and been
told your ticket is not valid. This makes you angry. This anger is
re-enacted in thousands of different scenarios in your life day after
day and year after year until you realize and truly believe the basic
tenets this Course has put forward. 

<sup>25.10</sup> To be in concert, just as to perform a concert, is
contingent on harmony. It is being in agreement about the purpose for
which you are here and your entitlement to be fully present here. If you
still believe you are here to acquire some perceived ideal separated
state, then all action will be out of harmony.  If, however, you have
accepted the basic tenets of this Course and believe you are here to
realize unity, then all action will be in harmony. If you believe you
and your brothers and sisters are here in a state of reprisal, having
fallen from grace, then all action will be out of harmony. If you
believe you and all other living things are here in a state of grace,
then all action will be in harmony. If you believe one living thing is
more important than any other, then all action will be out of harmony.
If you believe all are essential, then all action will be in harmony. 

<sup>25.11</sup> While one special relationship continues, all special
relationships continue because they are given validity. The holy
relationship of unity depends on the release of the beliefs that foster
special relationships. 

<sup>25.12</sup> To believe you are in concert with the universe is to
believe that you have no need for struggle, to believe you have no lack,
to believe in your state of grace. While you believe even one person is
against you, you are not in concert with God. While you believe fate
works against you, you are not in concert with the universe. These
attitudes confirm a continuing belief in your separated and vulnerable
state.  During the time of tenderness, you will learn, through the
practice of devotion, to identify and reject all such attitudes and to
adopt an attitude of invulnerability. 

<sup>25.13</sup> An attitude of invulnerability is necessary now. It is
not arrogance or a means by which to flirt with risk and danger. It is
simply your reality. During the time of tenderness you may feel
vulnerable. But the time of tenderness is a time of healing, and as you
are healed you will realize you are no longer vulnerable to being
wounded. Fear of being wounded—physically, mentally, emotionally, and
spiritually—has kept you from engaging with life. Being healed and
recognizing your own state of being healed is a key purpose of the time
of tenderness. You cannot realize your true identity while you hang on
to wounds of any kind. All wounds are evidence of your belief that you
can be attacked and hurt.  You have not necessarily seen disappointment
as attack or hopelessness as hurt, but you do feel these emotions as
wounds. While you think you can remain disappointed or disillusioned,
you will not be invulnerable.  There is always, behind every
disappointment or disillusion, every attack and every hurt, a person you
believe acted toward you without love. While you believe feelings of
lack of love come from anywhere but within, you will not be
invulnerable. 

<sup>25.14</sup> A realization of your invulnerability is not necessary
in terms of use but in terms of service. Those who claim invulnerability
and use it as a test of fate, or an excuse to challenge the mighty
forces of humanity or nature, will eventually lose the game they play.
True invulnerability can only be claimed by those who recognize it as
part of their true identity.  Invulnerability will then serve you and
your brothers and sisters. Its service is one of conquering fear and
allowing love to reign.

<sup>25.15</sup> Involvement flows from participation and engagement.
While it may conjure up notions of joining movements or parties, or of
making social contributions, pure joining is its objective. The first
joining comes from within and it is putting into practice the lessons of
joining mind and heart in wholeheartedness. 

<sup>25.16</sup> This first joining is a choice made from love without
regard for the personal self. You begin to live from love when the
personal self gets out of the way. And when the personal self gets out
of the way in any instance, it is the turning point. It is the signal
that you are ready to live from love. This is what this Course is about.
Living from love. Living from love is what will reverse the lessons of
the past.  Reversing the lessons of the past is what will allow you to
live in love in every instance. 

<sup>25.17</sup> Living in love in every instance is what occurs when
the whole Self is involved in the love of life. There are no “parts” of
the Self fractioned off and holding resentments. There are no “parts” of
Self living in the past or the future. There is not a “mindful” Self
living separately from a “soulful” Self. There is not a “worker” Self
living separately from a “prayerful” Self. All Selves are joined in
wholeheartedness. The one Self is solely involved in living love. 

<sup>25.18</sup> As you begin to live love, a reverse of what you might
expect to happen will happen. While you may expect that everything will
take on greater importance, the reverse will at first be true. You will
see little in what you do that matters. You will wonder why you are
unconcerned about many of the things you have been concerned about
previously. Your life may actually seem to have less purpose. You may
begin to wonder what to do. You will almost certainly question what you
do for a “living.” You will question many patterns and habits. 

<sup>25.19</sup> This is unlearning taking place. It may feel
frustrating and be tinged with anxiety, anger, confusion, perplexity,
even rage. You will doubt that these are the proper feelings of a person
living love. Yet they are common feelings of unlearning, and should be
accepted as such.  You will learn that while some things you have done
and will continue to do may not matter, they may still be done with
patience, grace, and love. You will learn that other things you have
done, beliefs you have held, patterns and habits that have occupied you,
will not accompany you into your life of love. These you will leave
behind. 

<sup>25.20</sup> You may also notice a growth in your desire to take
credit for what you have created, and a desire to create anew. At this
stage, this desire will come from a feeling of needing to reassert the
self. This need will arise as you realize that you can take no credit
for your life. Wanting to take credit is of the ego, and at this stage
the desire to create may be linked with ego as well. Your personal self
will be looking for a place in which to reside. It will be looking for
identity.  It will want to say: “*This is who I am.*” This is an
exciting sign, for it means the old identity is losing hold. Be patient
during this time, and your new identity will emerge. If the urge to
create is strong, certainly let it serve you. But do not seek for praise
or acknowledgment of your creations at this time. You will soon realize
that creation is not of, or for, the personal self. 

<sup>25.21</sup> This will be a time of discernment. You may feel it as
a time of decision making, but the less you attempt to make conscious
decisions the quicker your unlearning will take place and the lessons of
discernment occur.  Discernment is needed only until you are better able
to comprehend the whole. Comprehension of the whole is aided by a return
to wholeness of the Self. Until wholeness of the Self is complete,
discernment is necessary. 

<sup>25.22</sup> Practice discernment by being still and awaiting
wisdom.  Your feeling of being identity-less will make decision-making
and choices of all kinds appear to be difficult during this time. You
must realize decisions and choices are made by relying upon the very
lessons you are in the process of unlearning. At the same time, however,
decisions and choices will seem to need to be made with increasing
frequency. Your feeling of needing to make new choices, while strong,
will not necessarily reflect real need but rather an impatience with the
way things are and were. You will want to force change rather than wait
for it to arrive. If you acknowledge your impatience as a sign of
readiness for change that does not necessarily require action on your
part, you will feel some relief. 

<sup>25.23</sup> When action is seen to be necessary, this is exactly
when a time of stillness is needed. You might think of this time of
stillness as a time of consulting with your new identity. Simply sitting
quietly, and posing the question or concern that is in need of
appropriate action will suffice. When an answer comes to you,
acknowledge that it is an answer from your new identity and express
appreciation for it. While you will at times doubt that you have
received an answer or that the answer you have received is correct, you
will soon learn to trust this quiet process of discernment. You will
know you have succeeded when you truly feel as if you have “turned the
question or concern over” and allowed it to be responded to in a new
way. 

<sup>25.24</sup> When you are guided to act in ways that are contrary to
usual patterns of action you have taken in the past, you will often meet
resistance. Try to be lighthearted at such times and to remember that if
it “doesn’t matter,” you might as well try the new way. Remind yourself
that you have nothing to lose. You will soon learn that this is so. You
will also soon realize why this time of engagement with life is
necessary. Experience is necessary to complete the cycle of unlearning
and learning. 

<sup>25.25</sup> Being fully engaged with life while taking the time for
discernment is uncommon. Putting action before stillness, activity
before rest, is seen as synonymous with a full life. We must, therefore,
speak a bit of what a full life is.

