---
chapter: "7"
title: "Chapter 7: Withholding"
---

<sup>7.1</sup> A major thought reversal is required now before we can go
on. It has been stated and emphasized countless times before, and it
will be here as well: What you give you will receive in truth. What you
do not receive is a measure of what you withhold. Your heart is
accustomed to giving in a way that your mind is not. Your mind would
hold on to every idea for what it might bring you, and is resentful of
those whose ideas do come to fruition and succeed in getting desirable
things within this world. “I had that idea,” you lament when another
succeeds where you have failed. “I could have been where that person is
if not for the unfairness of life,” you wail. Your mind dwells in a
world of its own made up largely of *if onlys*. Your heart, on the other
hand, knows of giving and of a return not based on the world of your
mind or of physical circumstance. Despite disappointments most severe,
your heart knows that what you give you receive in truth. 

<sup>7.2</sup> And yet you would withhold a piece of yourself even from
love, and this is what we must correct. For what you withhold you cannot
receive, and you cannot receive a piece of heaven nor know a piece of
God or your own Self. Your giving must be total for you to receive in
truth. We will concentrate more now, however, on withholding than on
giving, for you do not yet understand what you would give, for you do
not recognize what you have to give. You do, however, recognize what you
withhold and can begin to recognize this in every situation. As the
awareness of your withholding dawns upon your heart, you will begin to
realize what you do not give, and with that realization, what you have
to give. 

<sup>7.3</sup> Comparison of one thing to another—a comparison that
seeks out differences and magnifies them and names one thing this and
one thing that—is the basis of all learning in your world. It is based
on contrast and opposites and on separating into groups and species. Not
only is each individual distinct and separate, but so too are groups of
individuals, pieces of land, systems and organizations, the natural
world and the mechanistic world, heaven and earth, divine and human. 

<sup>7.4</sup> In order to identify yourself in this world, you have had
to withhold a piece of yourself and say of this piece, “This is what
makes me uniquely who I am.” Without this piece of yourself that you
have determined to be unique, your existence would seem to serve even
less purpose than it does now. Thus that which is most separate, or that
which you have determined separates you the most, is that which you
value most highly. 

<sup>7.5</sup> This one thought constitutes a thought system in and of
itself, for it is the primary thought by which you live your life. Your
effort goes into maintaining this illusion that what you are must be
protected, and that your protection rests on holding this piece of
yourself separate.  Like the love you set aside from this world, this
thought too is one that can be used, for it recognizes that you are as
apart from this world as love is. The harsh realities of the world may
claim your body and your time, but this one piece of yourself that you
have set aside you allow it not to claim.  This piece is held within
your heart, and it is this piece with which we now will work. 

<sup>7.6</sup> This is the piece that screams never to that which would
beat you down. Life is seen as a constant taking away and this, you
claim, will *never* be taken from you. For those whose lives are
threatened, it is called the will to live. For those whose identity is
threatened, it is called the cry of the individual. For others it is the
call to create, and for still others the call to love. Some will not
give up hope to cynicism. Others label it ethics, morals, values, and
say this is the line I will *never* cross. It is the cry that says, “I
will not sell my soul.” 

<sup>7.7</sup> Rejoice that there is something in this world that you
will not bargain with, something you hold sacrosanct. This is your Self.
Yet this Self that you hold so dear that you will never let it go is
precisely what you must be willing to freely give away. This is the only
Self that holds the light of who you are in truth, the Self that is
joined with the Christ in you. 

<sup>7.8</sup> To this Self is this appeal put forth. Let it be heard
and held within your heart. Hold it joyously alongside what already
occupies your heart—the love you set aside and the piece of yourself
that you won’t let go. As you learn that what you give you will receive
in truth, you will see that what abides within your heart is all that is
worthy of your giving and all you would receive. 

<sup>7.9</sup> Let us return now to what you would withhold, and see the
effects that this withholding has upon yourself and the world that seems
to hold you separate. This is, indeed, the first and most general lesson
in regard to withholding: The world does not keep you separate. You keep
yourself separate from the world. This is what has made the world the
world it is. What you withhold allows illusion to rule and truth to be
locked away in a vault so impenetrable and so long secured that you have
thought it forgotten. You have not realized the vault is your own heart,
or that the truth is what you have chosen to keep secure and set aside
there. When you believe that this is so and that what you give away you
will receive in truth, you will throw open the doors to this safe house,
and all the joy you have kept from yourself will return. A great
exchange will happen as a powerful wind sweeps through your heart, and
all the love you have denied the world will be released. It will flow in
every direction, leaving not a corner of the universe untouched. In an
instant the eternal will be upon you. Death will be a dream as the wind
of life reunited with itself gathers from directions that are beyond
direction and breathes life back into what has so long been locked away.
After this a gentle breeze will come, never again to leave you, as life
breathes as one. 

<sup>7.10</sup> Your withholding takes on many forms that nonetheless
are merely effects of the selfsame cause that keeps truth separate from
illusion.  Where truth has come illusion is no more. Truth has no need
of your protection, for truth brought to illusion shines its light into
the darkness, causing it to be no more. 

<sup>7.11</sup> There are but two forms of withholding: what you
withhold *of* yourself from the world and what you withhold *for*
yourself from the world. A grievance is something you have chosen for
yourself, a piece of a relationship separated off and held in contempt
and righteousness. You are unaware that you choose this form of
withholding, sometimes dozens or even hundreds of times a day. An
unreturned phone call, a bit of traffic, a harsh word spoken, an
unremembered errand—all can be resentments you hold to yourself and
refuse to let go. By the time you begin your day you may hold several of
these in your mind, and there you build them into reasons for even
further withholding. Now you have an excuse—or several excuses—for a
*bad day*. Why should you give anything to anyone when your day has
already treated you so badly? You withhold even a smile, because you
have chosen grievances over love. 

<sup>7.12</sup> You might choose to tell those you encounter of your bad
day, and if they are properly sympathetic you may feel that you have
gotten something in exchange for the resentments you carry, and if the
exchange is determined to be of equal value you might let them go. A
response of less than sympathetic proportions, however, is simply added
to your list of grievances until the burden of what you hang onto
becomes more than you can bear. Now you look for one upon whom you can
unload your burdens, hoping you can pass your grievances *en masse* to
someone else.  If you succeed through anger, spite, or meanness, you
simply take on guilt and withdraw still further into your own misery.

<sup>7.13</sup> What you do not realize is that every situation is a
relationship—even those as simple as unreturned phone calls and snarled
traffic. You relate to someone or something in every situation you
encounter, and what you hold against them you withhold from them. You
have taken a piece of them and hold it unkindly to yourself, not in
joining but in separation. Totally unaware, you too are subject to these
whims of your brothers and sisters, and find at times pieces of yourself
scattered hither and yon, knowing they are lost to you but not knowing
how this loss came about or where to retrieve these missing pieces, not
knowing that you can prevent the loss entirely by being one. What is
joined cannot be parceled out and scattered, but must remain in
wholeness. What is joined resides in peace and knows no grievance. What
is joined resides in love inviolate. 

<sup>7.14</sup> There is another way in which you withhold pieces of
relationships for yourself. This withholding is not of the form of
grievances but of the form of specialness. You withhold in order to make
yourself special, always at another’s expense.  All your efforts to best
your brothers and sisters are thus: all competition, all envy, all
greed. These all relate to your image of yourself and your efforts to
reinforce it. This is your desire not to be intelligent, but to be
*more* intelligent than your colleague. This is your desire not to be
generous, but to be *more* generous than your relative. This is your
desire for wealth that is *greater* than your neighbors, attractiveness
*greater* than that of your friends, success *greater* than that of the
average man or woman. You pit yourself not only against individuals but
groups and nations, teams and organizations, religions and neighbors and
family members. This is the desire to be right, or in control, or to
have more or be more. This is life based on comparison of illusion to
illusion. 

<sup>7.15</sup> You do not see this as withholding, but what you claim
for yourself at another’s expense is indeed withholding, and in your
world you know not how to claim anything for yourself without
withholding it from someone else. You have now set yourself up in a
position to withhold your intelligence from others lest they profit from
it. You want your intelligence known and recognized, but you want it
known and recognized as *yours*. If someone wants the intelligence you
have to offer, something must be given in return. What you demand can
range from admiration to money, but it is all the same and the demand is
always there. It is the ransom that you insist be paid, the homage you
claim is due, that without which you will withhold what you have. And
you are thankful for these things with which you can demand ransom of
the world, for without them you would be the one called upon to pay. 

<sup>7.16</sup> These are examples of what you withhold from the world
*for* yourself. But what of that which you withhold from the world *of*
yourself? Both these things are much the same in truth, for what you
hold away from all the rest, what you hold for ransom and do not freely
give, you do not have the use of for yourself. Those ideas that you save
up, that creativity that only you would benefit from, that wealth you
would amass—these things are as useless to you when saved for yourself
alone as they would be if they did not exist. They bring you not to
truth or happiness, nor can they buy you love or the success you seek.
What you withhold from the world you withhold from yourself, for you are
not separate from the world. In every situation what you would keep is
what you will not have, because you keep it only from yourself. 

<sup>7.17</sup> We must return now to relationship and correct as
quickly as possible any erroneous ideas you have, especially those that
might make of this a trivial point or one that is specific and not
generalizable.  All relationship exists in wholeness. The small examples
used earlier were meant to help you recognize relationship itself,
relationship as something different from the objects, persons, or
situations related to.  Now we must expand on this idea. 

<sup>7.18</sup> Broadening your view from the specific to the general is
one of the most difficult tasks of the curriculum. It is easy to see why
this is so when you recognize how bound your thinking is to specifics.
Again, this is why we call on love and the hidden knowledge of your
heart. Your heart already sees in a manner much more whole than the
perception of your split mind. Even your language and images reflect
this truth, this difference between the wisdom of your heart and that of
your mind. Your heart may be said to break, but the image that these
words call forth is of a heart cracked open, not of a heart in separate
pieces. Your brain, on the other hand, is separated into right and left
hemispheres. One side has one function, one side another. While your
brain and your mind are not the same, your image of your mind and what
it does and does not do is linked with your image of your brain. Let
this image go and concentrate on the wholeness of your heart, no matter
how you view its current condition. Be it wounded, bleeding, broken or
full, it rests in wholeness within you at the center of who you are. 

<sup>7.19</sup> It is from this center that truth will light your way. 

<sup>7.20</sup> It is from this center that you will come to understand
that relationship exists in wholeness. We have begun to dislodge your
idea that you stand separate and alone, a being broken off from all the
rest.  Your forgiveness of all that has led to this misperception is not
yet complete, nor will it be until your understanding is greater than it
is now. For you cannot give up the only reality you know without
believing in and having at least some elementary understanding of what
the truth of your reality actually is.

<sup>7.21</sup> If you cannot be alone you must be continuously in
relationship.  Thus, relationship must not depend on interaction as you
understand understand it. It is easy to see the relationship between a
pencil and your hand, your body and another, the actions that you do and
the effects they seem to cause. All of these relationships are based on
what your senses tell you, the evidence you have relied upon to make
sense of your world. Those who have developed reliance on ways of
knowing not governed by the acceptable senses are seen as suspect. And
yet you accept many causes for your feelings, from variations in the
weather to unseen and unverifiable diseases. You have given others, whom
you see as having more authority than you, license to provide you with
their version of the truth, and for consistency’s sake you choose to
believe in the version of the truth most predominate in your society.
Thus the *truth* is different in one place than it is in another and it
even appears to be in conflict. You cling to known truths, even though
you are aware of their instability in time as well as place, and so you
live with constant denial that even what is known to you is not known at
all.  You thus cling to the one sure thing that permeates your
existence: the knowledge that death will claim you and all of those you
love.

<sup>7.22</sup> Realize that when you are asked to give this up, you are
asked to give up an existence so morbid that anyone with any sanity
would gladly toss it to the wind and ask for an alternative. An
alternative exists.  Not in dreams of fantasy but in truth. Not in
changing form and circumstance but in eternal consistency. 

<sup>7.23</sup> Accept a new authority, even if only for the little
while that it will take you to read these words. Start with this idea:
You will allow for the possibility of a new truth to be revealed to your
waiting heart.  Hold in your heart the idea that as you read these
words—and when you finish reading these words—their truth will be
revealed to you. Let your heart be open to a new kind of evidence of
what constitutes the truth.  Think of no other outcomes than your
happiness, and when happiness comes deny it not, nor its source. Remind
yourself that when love comes to fill your heart, you will deny it not,
nor its source. You do not need to believe that this will happen, but
only to allow for the possibility of it happening. Do not turn your back
on the hope offered here, and when new life flows in to release the old,
forget not from where it came.

