---
chapter: "19"
title: "Chapter 19: Oneness and Duality"
---

<sup>19.1</sup> There was no evil intent in the creation of the body as
a learning device, and as a learning device it was perfectly created.
The problem lies in what you have, in your forgetfulness, made of the
body. Only from thinking of the body as yourself did ideas of glorifying
the body arise. To glorify a learning device makes no sense. And yet in
creating the perfect device from which you could experience separation,
all such problems were anticipated and corrective devices created
alongside them.  You could not fully experience separation without a
sense of self as separate, and you could not fully experience anything
without your free will. A separate self with a free will operating in an
external world, as well as a spirit self desiring the experience of
separation, would naturally lead to a situation where the whole range of
experiences available to a separate being would exist. 

<sup>19.2</sup> The complex set of criteria needed to create a world of
separation was, in the instant of creation, anticipated and provided in
a form consistent with creation’s laws. While this world was created
with love, as all of creation was, it was also created to provide the
desired experience. Thus was fear born, for a separate self is a fearful
self by its nature. How could it not be? 

<sup>19.3</sup> You who have grown weary of this experience rejoice, for
you can choose a new experience. Your free will has not been taken from
you, nor has the power of creation abandoned you. Within creation’s own
laws does the solution rest. 

<sup>19.4</sup> The solution lies in transformation, and that is why you
are still needed here. Beneath the world of illusion that you have made
to glorify the separated self lies the world that was created for your
learning, and that so exists in truth. It is not the only world by any
means, but it is still heaven because heaven must be where you are. A
wholehearted choice to abandon all ideas of glorifying the separated
self and to let the world be what it is will begin the transformation.
This requires the first unification, the unification of mind and heart,
after which unification with God is naturally returned to your
awareness, for this unification returns you to the Christ in you and the
one mind united with God which you have never left. Creation’s power
then returns to you to help all the separated ones remember union.

<sup>19.5</sup> Although this all may sound like science fiction to you,
realize that you accept much in all areas of your life, from that of
religion to science itself, that sounds like fiction. You are not,
however, expected to believe all I have told you on faith alone.
Experience is needed to change your beliefs and to place your faith
securely in them. The first step in leading you to experience of another
kind is your willingness to accept that you are here to learn, and that
your body can provide the means. 

<sup>19.6</sup> Your saving grace is that even a separated self yearns
for union and knowledge of its Creator. Thus along with this yearning
was a means provided for its fulfillment, and with this fulfillment lies
the end of the separation. 

<sup>19.7</sup> I was part of this means, but only part.  Fulfillment
can be provided by each and every one of your brothers and sisters, for
in each is the Christ available to be seen and experienced as it was
from me. It is in your holy relationships that union can be found and
experienced, and thus from these that you fuel your desire for union
with all and for knowledge of your Creator. This yearning must but be a
pure yearning—untainted by fear and judgment and approached with
wholeheartedness—for it to be fulfilled. It is not the means that are
lacking but the wholehearted desire. 

<sup>19.8</sup> Let me speak briefly of the role I played so that you
can better understand the role that waits for you. I came in the
fulfillment of scripture. All this really means is that a certain
community had been led to expect my arrival. They awaited me with
expectation and so found in me what they hoped to find. What my brothers
and sisters saw in me allowed me to be who I was, even while in human
form. I tell you truly if you were to see any of your brothers and
sisters today as those who awaited my birth saw me, they too would
remember who they are. This is the role I ask you to accept so that you
can provide for others what was provided for me. 

<sup>19.9</sup> Each one of your brothers and sisters is as holy as I
and as beloved to God. Can you not witness to their belovedness as those
long ago witnessed to mine? You have not been able to do this thus far
because you have desired specialness for yourself and a few others
rather than belovedness for all. But now, perhaps, you are ready. 

<sup>19.10</sup> The separated self cannot relearn unity except through
union.  Here, union is achieved in relationship. To see your brothers
and sisters as those of long ago saw me is the way to achieve
relationship of the highest order and relearn communion, the language of
the heart.  This is why you have been asked to experience the spirit of
your brothers and sisters rather than simply relating to their bodies as
you always have. I was not seen as a body by those who believed in me,
although I had a body to help me learn just as you do. 

<sup>19.11</sup> My testimony witnessed to your arrival just as the
scriptures witnessed to mine. Even while some of my words were distorted
or misinterpreted, you can still revisit them and see that this is so. I
did not proclaim myself to be above or different from the rest, but
called each of you brother and sister and reminded you of our Father’s
love and of our union with Him. 

<sup>19.12</sup> Your belief in your brothers and sisters will not be
total, however, without the reunion of mind and heart that produces the
state of wholeheartedness. This state was not achieved at all times by
all those who believed in me—and perfection is not asked of you. As can
be clearly seen from the records left to you, the apostles did not, in
fact, achieve this state during my lifetime, for they looked at me as
different and looked to me for power. Only after my resurrection did the
Holy Spirit come upon them and reveal their own power to them by uniting
mind and heart with belief. They were then reunited with me as they were
united with the Christ. You thus must learn to see yourself as you see
your brothers and sisters, and to place your belief not in differences
but in sameness. 

<sup>19.13</sup> In order to do this there is still one more layer to
the unification of thought, and this brings up another reason for our
reliance on the heart. Thought, as you know it, is an aspect of duality.
It cannot be otherwise in your separated state. You must think in terms
of “I” and “them,” “death and life,” “good and evil.” This is thought.
Thought occurs in words, and words separate. It is only in combining
mind and heart with a focus on letting the heart lead that love can be
combined with thought in such a way as to actually transcend thought as
you know it. This transcendence is a function of wholeheartedness. 

<sup>19.14</sup> This is, in essence, why the greatest thinkers have not
been able to decipher the riddle, the mystery, of the divine, and why
they conclude that God is unknowable. God *is* knowable from within the
mystery of non-duality itself. It would be impossible for you to be a
being that can yearn for knowledge of your Creator without this
knowledge being available. In creation, all needs are fulfilled the
instant they become needs, which is why there are no needs. If
everything you need has been provided, having needs makes no sense. 

<sup>19.15</sup> Philosophy applies thought to mystery and that is why
philosophy becomes such a muddle of words. It is difficult for you to
accept that what you most need to know cannot be achieved through the
same methods you have used in order to know about other things. And,
increasingly, you are willing to exchange experience for second-hand
knowledge and to believe you can come to know through the experiences of
others. Yet, in the case of coming to know what lies before you
now—coming to know your own Self—it is obvious that another’s experience
will not bring this knowledge to you, not even my experience. If this
were so, all of those who read of my life and words would have learned
what I learned from my experience. While many have learned much of
others, this type of learning is but a starting point, a gateway to
experience. 

<sup>19.16</sup> To think without thought or know without words are
ideas quite foreign to you, and truly, while you remain here, even
experiences beyond thoughts and words you will apply word and thought
to. Yet love has often brought you close to a “thought-less” and
“word-less” state of being, and it can do so again. As you join with
your own Self in unity, all that in love you have created and received
returns to its home in you, and leaves you in a state of love in which
the wordless and formless is very near. 

<sup>19.17</sup> Your only concept of oneness is of a single form, a
single entity.  There is either one chair or two. One table or four.
Your emphasis has been on quantity, and one is seen as less than any
other number. Yet, on the other hand, when only one of anything exists
it is highly prized.  God is thus “God” due, at least in part, to what
you view as His singularity. You view those who worship many gods as
primitive, although those who believe in a god synonymous with creation
are closer to a true picture of God than those who view God as a
solitary figure. Still, oneness and unity go together, the unity of
creation being part of the oneness of God, and the oneness of God part
of the unity of creation. A mind trained by separation can have no
concept of this, as all concepts are born from the mind’s separate
thoughts. Yet this same mind could still conceive of a creator.  A mind
that can conceive of a creator combined with a heart that yearns for
knowledge of, and union with, that creator, can bypass the need for the
separate thoughts of the separated one’s thought system. But you must be
trained to do this. Thus your training begins. And begins with prayer. 

<sup>19.18</sup> As was said in the beginning, praying is asking. You
but asked for your separated state and it was made so. Now you need to
but ask for unity to return for it to be so. The condition or state of
being from which you ask is what is in need of adjustment and thus of
training before you can be aware of the answer you will receive. It is
clear you can ask for what you know not. This is not the problem. The
problem is in who is doing the asking. The separated self, while capable
of asking, is hardly capable of believing in or accepting the response.
It is this non-belief in a response that makes it capable of asking. Now
that you are beginning to shed the concept of the separate self and to
believe in the possibility of response, you will find yourself more
afraid to ask.  All your asking or prayer awaits is but your belief in
the love without fear that has always responded. 

<sup>19.19</sup> Out of the deepest, darkest chaos of your mind comes
the possibility of light. It is a bit like traveling backward, or the
review of life that some experience after death. In order to remember
unity you must, in a sense, travel back to it, undoing as you go all you
have learned since last you knew it, so all that remains is love. This
undoing, or atonement, has begun—and once begun is unstoppable and thus
already inevitably accomplished. 

<sup>19.20</sup> My brothers and sisters in Christ, do not become
impatient now. We are on the home stretch and all you long for is nearer
than ever before.  To talk of going “back” will undoubtedly make you
feel impatient, but this is not a going back that will in any way
resemble the “going back” that you have tried to do before. While it is,
in a sense, a request to review your life, it is the last such review
that will be required before letting the past go completely. All your
previous attempts to go back have been like attempts to pay a debt that
will never go away. This going back will leave you debt free and thus
free in truth. 

<sup>19.21</sup> This going back is the journey without distance. You
need not go in search of it, and in truth, cannot, for the past does not
abide in you. What you need rather do is strive for a place of stillness
from which what needs review can arise as if it were a reflection
arising from a deep pool. Here what is in need of healing will but
briefly come to the surface and leave the hidden depths where light
could not reach it and healing could not come.  What comes forth for
healing needs but a nod of love from your heart, a passing glance of
compassion, the merest moment of reflection, before it will dissipate
and show a new reflection. 

<sup>19.22</sup> This going back is, in reality, more in the way of
reflection than review, although if you were to think of this as a
re-viewing of your self, you would be quite accurate. It is like unto
the final judgment as it has been described, a sorting of the real from
the unreal, of truth from illusion. Despite the similarity between what
this will call forth and the description of the final judgment, judgment
is not the means or end of this reckoning.

<sup>19.23</sup> The loftiest aim of which you are currently capable is
that of changing your perception. Although our ultimate goal is to move
beyond perception to knowledge, a first step in doing this is changing
your means of perception to that of right-mindedness. Your willingness
to accept me as your teacher will help you to accept my sight as your
own and thus to be right-minded. The way you have perceived of yourself
and your world until now has not been right-minded, and you are
beginning to realize this. Thus it is now appropriate for the
realization to come to you that your mind, and your perception, can be
changed. This is necessary before you can look back in a new way and not
simply cover the same ground you have covered a million times, seeing
causes for recriminations, blame, and guilt. Looking back in judgment is
not what is required here. Only the opposite will advance our aim of
uniting mind and heart. 

<sup>19.24</sup> The Holy Spirit exists in your right mind, and is the
bridge to exchanging perception for knowledge.  Knowledge is light, and
the only light in which you can truly see. You will not truly desire to
unite your mind and heart in wholeheartedness until you see clearly. One
purpose of the distinctions you have made between mind and heart are
their ability to keep one part of yourself blameless. Whatever happens,
your divided notion of yourself allows you to both protect and conceal.
Fault always lies elsewhere. The guiltless part of you is always free to
redeem the guilt-filled self. This idea of self-redemption has long been
a culprit that has kept union, even with your own Self, undesirable to
you. The concept that in oneness there is no need for blame or guilt or
even for redemption is inconceivable to the separate mind. But not to
the heart.

