---
chapter: "26"
title: "Chapter 26: The Full Life"
---

<sup>26.1</sup> It is often spoken of with some amazement that I lived a
short life, preached for only a small part of it, traveled not very far,
had few possessions or influential friends. We have talked before of the
tragedy you feel when anyone dies young. You each have some notion of
what you believe a full life to be. For some of you it would include
marriage and children, for others career, religious commitment, or
creative endeavors. Some would think of travel and adventure,
friendships, or financial security. Most of you will think of having a
long life.

<sup>26.2</sup> Many of you question the line between fate and
accomplishment. Are some chosen for greatness? Others for mediocrity? 

<sup>26.3</sup> Few recognize the tragedy in the *life* of a person,
except in instances of great dichotomy, perhaps best expressed in the
life of the tragic hero. This observance of tragedy *in life* occurs
only when the observation is also made of the greatness, the glory, *in
the life*.  Without the recognition of the glory of life, there is no
recognition of tragedy until the life has ended. In contrast, in the
life of the tragic hero, excluding those who are posthumously given such
a title, the tragedy is most often considered a fall from greatness. It
is seen in the allure of myths where those who associate themselves too
closely with the gods are punished for such folly. Such fear of
greatness and glory, of the possibility of a fall from greatness and
glory, results in many tragedy-less lives. “Nothing ventured, nothing
gained,” is an axiom for such lives. Fear of the “fall” is a primal
fear, the first fear, the fear behind all such axioms. 

<sup>26.4</sup> Again I offer my life as the example life and reiterate
the message expressed in *A Course in Miracles*: The true meaning of the
crucifixion is that it was the last and final end to all such fears and
myths. All such fears were taken to the cross with me and banished in
the resurrection of the glory that is ours. 

<sup>26.5</sup> Do not be afraid. My brothers and sisters in Christ,
realize that there is no cause for fear.  You cannot fly too closely to
the sun. You cannot be deceived any longer by tales of woe or of fallen
heroes. Your story is one of glory. Your greatness can no longer be
denied, unless *you* deny it. 

<sup>26.6</sup> Do you feel beautiful and prized and worthy? Then so
shall you be. 

<sup>26.7</sup> No fear is greater than the fear of meaninglessness.
And, as stated before, the quest for meaning is how you have described
your purpose here. To have no meaning to attach to your life is the
tragedy you see within it and attempt to keep hidden from yourself. This
fear goes hand in hand with your fear of the fall, for if you were to
attempt to assign the meaning to your life that you think it should
have, a fall would surely await you, at least in your imaginings. You
are thus caught in a double bind, living a life you feel is devoid of
meaning and letting fear keep you from seeking the meaning you would
give it. You feel no inherent sense of purpose, no grace, no meaning
beyond what you would give to your own endeavors.  

<sup>26.8</sup> This is what we now leave behind as we seek to become
involved with life. I say *we* because I am with you and will not leave
your side. I say *we* because your first involvement is involvement with
Christ, an involvement that links us in oneness and glory once again. I
say *we* because *we are life*. I say *we* because we cannot live love
apart from one another. 

<sup>26.9</sup> You do not yet, but will soon realize the happiness that
is ours.  Your mind can just not accept that happiness as well as
meaning is due you through no effort of your own. Scenes of your life
play through your mind that “prove” that you are neither inherently
happy, nor your life inherently meaningful. Your reliance on these
scenes and memories must be broken before my words can reach your mind
and begin to replace these scenes with new ones. Until that time is upon
you, let my words touch your heart. 

<sup>26.10</sup> You who struggle to understand what these words say and
what they might mean, who strive to find the clues to what they ask you
to do, will find it difficult to cease your struggle and your striving.
You find it almost impossible still to believe effort is not called
for—that what your heart but wishes for could simply come true through
your acceptance of these words. But I am prepared to make it easy for
you. 

<sup>26.11</sup> You who have so sought happiness without finding it,
rejoice. It is not lost. It does not require you to define it or put a
name to it before it can be yours. Is this not what you have cried about
in frustration? Have you not long sought to put a name on happiness?
Have you not long lamented that if you knew what would bring you
happiness you would surely pursue it? Have you not long stated that if
you knew what would bring meaning to your life you would surely do it?
Have you not long wished to know your purpose? To be given a goal that
would fulfill the longing in you? Have you not prayed for signs or read
books that have promised you a series of steps to take to get where you
want to go, only to realize you know not where that is?

<sup>26.12</sup> And have you not become impatient with advice, with
teachers, and with courses of study? Have you not felt at the limit of
your patience with instruction? Have you not felt the call to live
growing stronger in you by the day? Are you not anxious to say: “Tell me
what to do and I will do it?” Are you not ready for certainty above all
else? Are you not ready to be done with studying and to begin with
living? Have you not become increasingly convinced that you have not
been living, and wondered what it is you have been doing? Have you not
grown weary of what passes for life in your world? Have you not wished
you could throw out all the thoughts and worries that fill your mind and
begin anew?

<sup>26.13</sup> Are you not simply ready to be done with the way things
have been and to begin a new way? Are you not ready to listen to a new
voice?

<sup>26.14</sup> All this frustration and impatience has been building.
This buildup has been necessary. Now, like an explosion waiting to
happen, it only needs a trigger to be released. With its release the new
can begin.

<sup>26.15</sup> This Course is but a trigger. These words the prelude
to the explosion. It is as if you have been waiting for someone to
whisper: Now! The whisper has come. The time is now.  

<sup>26.16</sup> Can you let the worries of today leave your mind? Can
you let the disappointments of yesterday go and be no more? Can you let
the planning for the future cease? Can you be still and know your Self? 

<sup>26.17</sup> This is perhaps disappointing to you, but it is all
that is required. If you could truly succeed at doing this for one
instant, you would experience all that is holy and be forever new. 

<sup>26.18</sup> You may experience disappointment at these words, and
feel as if you have been waiting to be invited to a party and that the
invitation hasn’t come. This is because you are ready for the next step,
the step of being engaged with life. The step of living from love. And I
assure you, there is no need to sit about and wait for the time of the
celebration to come. This is the invitation to the celebration. This is
the invitation to greet this day with no worry, disappointment, or
planning. This is the invitation to greet your Self and to find your
Self within this day. 

<sup>26.19</sup> It requires no new plans. It asks not that you make any
decisions.  It asks not that you *do* anything new. This is an
invitation from love to love. It asks only that you be open and allow
giving and receiving as one to take place. It asks only that you be
unoccupied with the old so that the new may arrive. It asks only that
you listen to your heart and let your Self be heard. 

<sup>26.20</sup> I cannot tell you here what you will hear. How can I,
when each of you will hear the answer of your heart? The calling of love
to love inviolate? The answer that only you can hear. There is no mold,
no form, no stock answer. This is why all answers have disappointed you
in the past. Your answer is not the same as any other. No matter how
filled with wisdom one person’s answer may be, it is not yours. 

<sup>26.21</sup> You are a thought of God. An idea. This thought, or
idea, is what you seek. It can be found only at its source. Its source
is love, and its location is your own heart. 

<sup>26.22</sup> Think a moment of a novel or movie with no plot.  This
would be the same as saying that there was no idea brought to completion
within the pages or on the film. In God’s idea of you is all that is
known about you. God’s idea of you is perfect, and until now your form
has been but an imperfect representation of God’s idea. In God’s idea of
you is the pattern of the universe, much as within a novel, movie, piece
of music, invention or artistic idea is the completion of the pattern
that will make that idea a masterpiece. An idea is irrevocably linked
with its source and one with its source.  There was no God separate from
you to have this idea of you. You were birthed in unison with God’s idea
of you. 

<sup>26.23</sup> This does not need to be understood, but only accepted
to the extent you can accept it. This is necessary because of your
reliance on a God who is “other” than you for the provision of your
answers.  Acceptance of your birth in unison with God’s idea of you is
acceptance of your Self as co-creator of the pattern of the universe,
acceptance of the idea or the story that is you. Can you not see that
you were birthed into a place in the pattern of God’s creation? Or that
you not only can know but have always known of this place? 

<sup>26.24</sup> This is not a place of physical form but a place of
holiness, an integral place in the pattern that is oneness with God. It
is a place you have never left but that you long for, believing that you
know it not. Your life here is much like a search for your story. Where
will this chapter lead? What will the end be like? Was one event a
mistake and another a blessing in disguise? You seek to know your
story’s table of contents, or at least a brief outline. Where does your
life fit in the larger picture? And yet, you realize that—like reading a
story—when the end is reached and all is known, the story is over except
in memory and reflection and perhaps in speculation. What might a sequel
reveal? 

<sup>26.25</sup> This viewing of your life as a story is what you do.
You spend each day in review or speculation. What has happened and what
will happen next? You attempt to rewrite previous chapters and to cast
all the parts and plan all the events of the next. This is, in effect,
your attempt to control what you do not believe you created, and what
you feel deprived of creating. As a being birthed by a thought of God,
you grew simultaneously with God’s thought. You knew your place in the
pattern of creation from the outset. A full life is quite simply a
fulfillment of that thought and that pattern. The only way to know it is
to think it once again. The only way to think it once again is to be
wholehearted, for a split mind and heart do not think clearly.

<sup>26.26</sup> Being whole is being present. Being whole is being all
you are.  Being whole is being present as all you are. When this occurs
you are All in All, One in being with your Father. 

<sup>26.27</sup> I fulfilled my story, my pattern, the idea of me that
came from the thought of God. In doing so, I restored unity, oneness
with God. I ushered in the new way that you are now longing to adopt. I
ushered in a time of being.

