---
chapter: "24"
title: "Chapter 24: The Time of Tenderness"
---

<sup>24.1</sup> Where you learned to hate, you will learn to love. Where
you learned to fear, you will learn safety. Where you learned to
distrust, you will learn trust. And each learning experience will be a
learning experience *because* it will touch your heart. It may be as
simple as a smile from a child that melts away all the resentment you
held from your childhoodâ€”*because* you allow that smile to touch your
heart. It may be a time of weepiness and what you would term
emotionalism. You may feel as if everything makes you want to cry
because everything will touch you, each lesson will feel tender.
Unlearning has no harshness about it. If you simply allow it to come, it
will reward you constantly with what can best be described as
tenderness. 

<sup>24.2</sup> The time to resist tenderness is over. The time to
resist the tears of weariness is over. This is the time of the embrace. 

<sup>24.3</sup> These feelings of tenderness can be seen as a sign. Let
them alert you that unlearning is taking place. Welcome them as
harbingers of this good news. Know that the time of tenderness is a sure
path on the way home. 

<sup>24.4</sup> The time of tenderness precedes the time of peace and is
the forerunner of compassion. The time of tenderness is thus the final
learning ground before accomplishment is complete. The learning that
occurs during the time of tenderness is learning from love. No lessons
learned without love touch your heart. No lessons that do not touch your
heart will accomplish anything. The purpose of the final lessons is both
unlearning and moving through unlearning to new learning. These lessons
must be accomplished in life and require an engagement with life. This
engagement is a promise, a commitment. It requires participation,
involvement, attention, being present. These are the lessons with which
we will conclude.

