---
chapter: "16"
title: "Chapter 16: What You Choose Instead"
---

<sup>16.1</sup> The glory that you felt from love only seemed to be
available from one and not from another. Love is not available *from*
anyone in the way you think it is. Love has but one source! That this
source lies within each of you does not make it many sources, for the
many of you have but one source as well. This common source does not
make any of you special, but all of you the same. 

<sup>16.2</sup> You may ask now why it doesn’t seem so, and the only
answer is that you do not want it to. You perceive but what you wish
for, and your wish for specialness leads you not to see sameness
anywhere at all, for what is the same cannot be special. 

<sup>16.3</sup> You all are familiar with the “problem” child who seeks
love and attention in ways deemed inappropriate. You know this child is
no less than any other child, and what he seeks the same as any other.
Yet if this child grows up with behavior that remains unchanged you call
him deviant or criminal, and claim that it is not love he seeks, and
that he is now less than those who once were the same as he. What is the
same does not change and become different. Innocence is not replaced by
sin. 

<sup>16.4</sup> What you do to criminals you do but to yourself and to
those you claim to love with a special love. For you do not see them in
the changeless innocence in which they were created and remain, but with
the eyes of judgment. That you have judged and found the ones you love
good and worthy of your love makes not your judgment justified any more
than the judgment that condemns a body to death or to “life” in prison. 

<sup>16.5</sup> Life in prison and a body condemned to death is what
judgment does to all of you who believe that what is the same can be
made different.  This is as true of the love you reserve for special
ones as it is of the condemnation you reserve for others you have
singled out. For judgment is what is required to make one special and
another not. 

<sup>16.6</sup> Without judgment there would be no separation, for you
would see no difference between yourself and your brothers and sisters.
Your judgment began with your own self, and from it was all conflict
born. Without differences there is no cause for conflict. Judgment makes
different. It looks past what is the same and sees it not and sees
instead what it is looking for. What you are looking for is what you
will find, but finding it does not make it the truth, except as it is
the truth about what you choose to see. Your choice lies with God or
with the self you believe you have succeeded in separating from Him, and
based on this choice alone is how you see determined. 

<sup>16.7</sup> Judgment is the function the separated mind has given
itself. This is where all of its energy is expended, for constant
judgment is required to maintain the world you see. The Holy Spirit can
replace your specialness with a special function; but this function
cannot be yours while you choose judgment itself as your proper role.

<sup>16.8</sup> Only your heart can lead you to the forgiveness that
must overcome judgment. A forgiven world is a world whose foundation has
changed from fear to love. Only from this world can your special
function be fulfilled and bring the light to those who still live in
darkness.

<sup>16.9</sup> Child of God, see you how important it is that you
listen to your heart! Your heart does not want to see with judgment or
with fear. It calls to you to accept forgiveness that you may give it
and henceforth look upon the forgiven world with love. 

<sup>16.10</sup> I repeat again that reason does not oppose love, as
your split mind would have you believe it does.  For your split mind
judges even love and opposes it on the basis that it uses no judgment!
Here you can see the value that you place on judgment, even to the
ridiculous notion that you can judge judgment itself. You deem yourself
capable of making good judgments and poor judgments, and you deem love
as being capable of neither. Love seems to operate on its own apart from
what your mind would bid it do, and this is why you fear it even while
you yearn for it. This is what the split mind would call reason—a world
in which there are two sides to everything and two sides that oppose
each other. How can this be reason? The truth opposes nothing, nor does
love. 

<sup>16.11</sup> Again your memory of creation serves you, even if it
has not served you well. It is this memory that tells you that love does
not judge, and only your split mind that has made of this memory what
will serve its purpose. What it calls a deficiency is your saving grace.
Letting go of what your mind would tell you in favor of what your heart
already knows is but the purpose of this Course.

<sup>16.12</sup> Only forgiveness replaces judgment, but true
forgiveness is as foreign to you as is true love. You think forgiveness
looks upon another in judgment and pardons the wrongs you would
enumerate. True forgiveness simply looks past illusion to the truth
where there are no sins to be forgiven, no wrongs to be pardoned.
Forgiveness looks on innocence and sees it where judgment would see it
not. 

<sup>16.13</sup> This form of forgiveness seems impossible to you
because you look upon an unforgiven world where evil walks, danger
lurks, and nowhere is safety to be found. Each separated one is out for
his or her own self, and if you do not watch out for your own safety,
surely you will perish.  Yet while you watch vigilantly, you know that
you cannot protect yourself and that you are not safe. There is only one
of you and so many of “them.” Never can you keep your guard up quite
enough or secure a final guarantee against disaster. And yet you cling
to all attempts to do so even while knowing they are ineffective. 

<sup>16.14</sup> You think you cannot give up your vigilance because you
know no other way to ensure your safety, and even if you cannot
guarantee your safety against everything all of the time, you believe
you can guarantee your safety against some things some of the time. And
for this occasional protection that has no validity and no proof you
give up love! 

<sup>16.15</sup> While you claim you need proof before you can believe
or accept something as a fact or as the truth, and certainly before you
can act upon it, you live as if you believe that what has never worked
before will somehow miraculously work in the future. You have nothing
but evidence of a life of unhappiness and despair, where occasional
moments of joy or the few people that you love out of the many that you
do not are all that make your life worth living. You think that to be
asked to give up the caution, protection, and vigilance that protects
these moments of joy and people you love as well as your own self is to
be asked to live a life of even greater risk than that which you live
now. 

<sup>16.16</sup> Your judgment has not made the world a better place!
If history proves anything, it proves the opposite of what you would
care to believe. The more the individual, society, and culture indulge
in the desire to judge, the more godlike they think they make
themselves. For all of you here know that judgment is not your place,
and that it belongs to God and God alone. This is firmly attached to
your memory of creation. To wrestle the right to judge away from God is
an act against God, and like a child who has dared to defy his parents,
the act of defiance fills the defiant one with boldness. Something
dangerous has been tried and has seemingly succeeded. The order of the
universe has flipped. The child believes she has “stolen” the role of
parent away from the parent without having become a parent. God has
become the enemy to those who judge just as the parent of a defiant
child becomes the enemy in the child’s perception. 

<sup>16.17</sup> But the child is wrong. The child has made a mistake.
And with this mistake, the child believes that the relationship with the
parent has been severed. It is this belief in a severed relationship
with God that seems to replace the holy relationship that cannot be
replaced.  Judgment thus reinforces the idea of separation, making of it
something even darker than it started out as being. It no longer seems
like a choice that the child has made, but seems to be an irreparable
rift that a new choice cannot mend.

<sup>16.18</sup> Child of God, this is not so and cannot ever be, for
the right to judge is but the right of the Creator who judges all of
creation as it was created and remains. You only think that you have
changed the unchangeable. 

<sup>16.19</sup> Judgment does not make you safe, and defining evil does
not abolish it, but only makes it real to you. Yet you believe judgment
to be based on justice, and justice to include the punishment of those
you have defined as evil. You have thus made justice one with vengeance,
and in doing so have robbed justice of its meaning.

<sup>16.20</sup> Those who sit in judgment call upon their power to do
what it cannot do. All power comes from love, as does all justice. Any
basis other than love for power or for justice makes a mockery of both.
*Might makes right* is a saying that is known to many of you, and even
those who know the saying do not believe in the tenets it represents.
This, you will claim, you have evidence for. It is all around you. The
strong survive and the weak perish. The mighty prevail, and so define
what is right for all those over whom they prevail. Those in power are
those who make the laws, and those who have no power must obey them. 

<sup>16.21</sup> And yet you are as frightened of those who have no
power as those who do.  Criminals are feared and shunned, and yet they
have no power but that which they make from their own selves. You want
power to come only through legitimate channels and do not want those who
have no power to possess it through the same weapons or might that you
claim make those in authority powerful. While you want those to whom you
have given power to protect you, you also fear them, and they in turn
fear the powerless who might take away their power or rise up against
them. What kind of power is it that needs to be constantly defended?
What is it about the powerless that frightens you, except that they
might not accept their powerless state? And what does this say but what
history has shown you—that who is powerful and who is not is not
determined by might or any authority that can be given and taken away.
Power is possessed by those who claim it. By those who cry *I am*. For
the beginning of power comes from the rejection of powerlessness. The
rejection of powerlessness is but a step toward your identity achieved
through the awakening of love of Self. 

<sup>16.22</sup> What misery the world has suffered in the name of
judgment, power, and justice. What misery can be avoided by finding the
true power inherent in your identity. For you are not powerless. Those
of you who think you have traditional means of power on your side turn
not to your own power, and then you wonder why those most spiritual,
both currently and historically, seem to suffer hardship. Yet it is
often only those who suffer hardship who will rise up and claim the
power that is their own instead of looking for it elsewhere. Your
perception but looks at power backward and wonders why God has forsaken
a people who seem to be so godly. 

<sup>16.23</sup> God forsakes no people, but people forsake God when
they give away their power and claim not their birthright. Your
birthright is simply the right to be who you are, and there is nothing
in the world that has the power to take this right from you. The only
way you lose it is by giving it away. And this you do.

<sup>16.24</sup> God wants no sacrifice from you, yet when you give away
your power you make of yourself a sacrificial lamb, an offering unto God
that God does not want. You look back on stories of sacrifice from the
Bible and think what a barbaric time that was, and yet you repeat the
same history but in different form. If a talented physician were to give
up his power to heal you would surely call it a waste, and yet you give
up your power to be who you are and think it is just the way life is.
You give away your power and then bow down to those whom you have given
it to, for you are afraid of nothing more than your own power. 

<sup>16.25</sup> This fear but stems from what you have used your power
for. You know your power created the world of illusion in which you
live, and so you think another must be able to do it better. You no
longer trust yourself with your own power, and so you have forgotten it
and realize not how important it is for it to be reclaimed. As good as
you may want to be, you would still go meekly through your life trying
to comply with rules of God and man with thought of some greater good in
mind. If everyone did what he or she wanted to do, you reason, society
would collapse and anarchy would rule.  You think you are only fair in
deciding that if everyone cannot do what they would want, then you, too,
must abdicate your wishes for the common good. You thus behave in
“noble” ways that serve no purpose. 

<sup>16.26</sup> If you cannot claim at least a small amount of love for
your own Self, then neither can you claim your power, for they go
hand-in-hand.  There is no “common good” as you perceive of it, and you
are not here to assure the continuance of society. The worries that
would occupy you can be let go if you but work instead for the return of
heaven and the return of your own Self.

