---
chapter: "12"
title: "Chapter 12: Origin of Separation"
---

<sup>12.1</sup> The word love is part of your problem with this Course.
If I were to take the word love and change it to some
sophisticated-sounding technical term, and say this is the stuff that
binds the world together in unity, it would be easier for you to accept.
If I were to say you know not of this sophisticated term and this is why
you have believed in your separation rather than in your unity with all
things, you would be far more likely to nod your head and say, “I was
but ignorant of this, as was everyone else.” If a scientist were to tell
you that a benign energy had been found that proved your connection to
everything in the universe, and gave it some fancy name, you would say,
“A new discovery has been found and I am willing to believe it may be
true, especially if others are also going to believe it to be true.” 

<sup>12.2</sup> You feel a little duped at being told love is the
answer. You feel a little chastised to be told you know love not. You
feel a little deceived to think that love may not be limited to what you
have thought it to be. You think it is typical of a spiritual text to
tell you love is the answer, as if it has not been said before. This
message was preached long ago and still the world remains the same. How
could this be the correct answer when this is so? Life is too
complicated to be solved by love. 

<sup>12.3</sup> How quickly you would return to cynicism and to
believing you have already tried and failed. For all of you believe that
you have tried this idea called love, and all of you believe you have
evidence that it is not the answer at all. What is your evidence? Your
own failure to be happy and the unhappiness of the world you see. 

<sup>12.4</sup> We have said before the only meaning possible for your
free will is your choice of what to join with and your choice of what to
leave outside of yourself. Yet you must understand that nothing that is
not part of God is worthy of joining, nor *can* join with you. What you
have sought to join with is the reason for your unhappiness. For you
seek to join with what cannot be joined, and you seek separation from
all that could be joined with you and all that would fill your dark and
lonely places with the happiness you seek.

<sup>12.5</sup> This Course may seem to have come far astray from what
you would have it do, for you are looking for something specific from
it, though you know it not. You are looking for the rest and quiet joy
that only comes from love. You are looking for the safety and security
of a loving home, even if it is one only of philosophy. You look for the
soft assurance of certainty, not of your mind but of your heart. There
is a part of you that thinks, “*If I could just be sure&hellip;*” and
stops there, for you are not even sure of what it is you seek assurance.
And yet you know what tires you most is your inability to be certain of
anything. And you are tired indeed. 

<sup>12.6</sup> God’s will for you is happiness, and of this you can be
certain. To align your will with God’s is but to make this certain state
your home.  This is but a wish come true, and when it is all you wish
for it will come to be. And in the granting of this wish will come your
rest and the laying down of every heavy burden you have carried.  

<sup>12.7</sup> Admit now your desire to rest, a desire that could make
you weep and make you wish to sleep an endless sleep. If you but
understood the energy required to keep the world of your illusion in its
place, you would understand the rest that will simply come of giving up
your need to do so. Your desire for certainty is part of your resistance
to any ideas that seem to be about change. What little that you think
you know you would strive to keep, and yet deep down you realize that
you know nothing with the certainty you seek. 

<sup>12.8</sup> Uncertainty of any kind is doubt about your Self. This
is why this Course aims to establish your identity, for from it all the
rest will come. As such, this Course seems to ask for change at every
level, and yet from one change alone will all the others follow—and
through no effort on your part at all.  And even this one change is not
a change at all, for it merely seeks to remove all the changes you but
think that you have made to God’s creation. This change seeks but to
restore you to your Self. 

<sup>12.9</sup> Your Self rests totally unchanged within the Christ in
you.  Re-establishing your relationship with your brother is what will
show your Self to you.  You have one brother who wears but many faces in
your perception of who he is, and while you know him not you cannot know
your Self. This one brother can unite you with all whom you perceive as
others, for all others are one with him as well as you. This is the one
joining that needs to occur to bring about all the rest. 

<sup>12.10</sup> This is the one disjoining that your choice for
separation brought about, and it is but a separation from your Self.
This is the most difficult point to get across, because in it lies a
contradiction, the one contradiction that has created the world you see
and the life you live. Although it is impossible for something to have
gone wrong in God’s creation, something has gone wrong! All you need do
is look about you to know that this is so—and, rather than be
discouraged by this news, you breathe a sigh of relief because you knew
this to be true and yet have felt as if this is the secret that has been
kept from you. It is as if you are told endlessly “everything is fine”
while you know this is not true. And if “everything” is fine, it must
just be you who are all wrong. 

<sup>12.11</sup> All of creation seems to hum along in perfect harmony.
The stars light up the sky, the sun and moon do what they were appointed
to do, the animals of the sea, ground, and air are but what their
Creator bade them be, the mountains stand in all their majesty, rivers
flow and desert sands countless in number are blown endlessly about.
Everything seems to be what it is and what it has always been, but for,
perhaps, the mark of man upon it. Yet the moon remains the moon despite
man’s landing on it.  The earth remains the earth despite your highways,
roads and bridges.  And somewhere you know not, peace remains peace
despite your wars, and happiness remains happiness despite your despair. 

<sup>12.12</sup> Yet what of you?  You, too, seem to have remained the
same for countless ages. Perhaps you believe that long ago you evolved
from a form different than that which you inhabit now; but certainly
within the laws of evolution, you have changed as little as the birds of
the air or fish of the sea. Yet somehow you know that in all of
creation, it is humanity alone that somehow is not what it was meant to
be. On a lovely day and in a lovely place you can see that creation’s
paradise still exists, but nowhere can you find the being God created in
His image.  

<sup>12.13</sup> Does it make any sense at all that this would come to
be? Or that once upon a time there walked upon the earth those who did
reveal God’s image, and that when they ceased to be seen here God’s
image was lost to earth forever? Could even one have come and gone and
left this void forever more unfilled? A gaping hole within the universe
itself? 

<sup>12.14</sup> But one was needed to end the separation, and in this
one are all the rest joined. For what alone in all creation could be
affected by your free will but your own self?  But one was needed to, of
his own free will, join his will with his Father’s for it to be done for
all.  This is all correction or atonement means, and all that is in need
of your acceptance. Join your brother who made this choice for all, and
you are reunited with the Christ in you.

<sup>12.15</sup> Joined minds cannot think separately and have no hidden
thoughts.  They are, in fact, not minds in the plural at all, but
all-one-mind.  What this Course is saying is that at some point that
does not exist in time, God’s son made the choice for separation.
Whether God’s son had one form or many at that time matters not, for one
form or many, there was still one mind, the mind of God’s son joined in
unity with that of his Father. Many of you have been taught this mystery
of faith. Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are One. If you had indeed
learned what you were taught, the separation would be no more. 

<sup>12.16</sup> These words, *Father, Son, and Holy Spirit*, like the
word *love*, are but symbols representing ideas that represent what is.
That you have made of the Father a singular figure, somehow greater than
the Son, and accepted the Holy Spirit as something largely not within
your understanding, only exemplifies the nature of the error in need of
correction. While words, as symbols, cannot fully explain what cannot be
symbolized, a beginning is made that must be completed through the
memories of your heart. So we continue, realizing that these words can
express the truth only within their ability as symbols, and that farther
than where these symbols can take you, the truth lies within your Self. 

<sup>12.17</sup> You have all seen the way a thought that seems to arise
out of nowhere can affect you. An idea, birthed one day, does not seem
to have been there the day before.  Perhaps it is the idea of taking a
trip or having a baby, of returning to school, or quitting a job. This
idea, newly birthed, may seem to come and go, or may grow into an
obsession, but either way, it leaves not its source. And without the
birth of the idea, the results of the idea would not come to be. You may
have a thousand ideas one day and ten thousand the next, so many that
you could never keep track of them all, and yet they still exist within
you and do not splinter off and become something on their own apart from
you.  Imagine this occurring and you will see how senseless this
situation would be. Could a trip happen on its own? To whom would it
happen? 

<sup>12.18</sup> You may very well say, however, that an idea seemed to
take on a life of its own and compel you to do things you might have
never dreamed of doing. People often look back upon their lives and
wonder how they got from here to there, and some may see that one idea
took root and changed what seemed to be a destiny already written. 

<sup>12.19</sup> As near as words can describe the separation, this is
what occurred: An idea of separation entered the mind of God’s son. Like
any idea of yours, this idea did not leave its Source nor change the
essence of its Source in any way. While the idea of taking an
adventurous vacation when brought to fruition might reshape the life of
the one participating in it, it would not change who that person was, or
who his father was, or the nature of the family he was born into. All
that would change would be the shape of his life, the things that would
happen within it, perhaps the places in which it would occur or the
people that would be part of it. In short, the external aspects of the
life.

<sup>12.20</sup> From the idea of separation came the idea of an
external aspect of life. Before the idea of the separation, there was no
such thing—and there still is no such thing except as an extension of
the original idea. Just as we discussed your desire to protect or to
control proceeding from the concept of fear, and realized that without
fear they would not exist, so too is it with the external aspect of
life. Without the original idea of separation, the external aspect of
life would not exist. Just as fear is not real although it seems to be,
separation is not real although it seems to be. 

<sup>12.21</sup> The Father did not prevent the idea of separation from
taking place, and could not any more than you could prevent an idea from
occurring to you. Just as an idea of yours, once born, continues to
exist, so too, did this idea of separation. But just as your ideas do
not take on a life of their own even though they at times seem to, this
idea as well had no ability to be more than what it was, except for as
the son chose to participate in it. 

<sup>12.22</sup> Thus, the son’s participation in the idea of separation
seemed to bring about a completely reshaped life, a destiny different
than that which had already been written. Yet this participation could
not but proceed from the original idea and could not proceed in reality
but only in the external aspect of life that preceded it. The idea of
separation changed nothing in reality, but became a drama acted out upon
a stage so real that it seemed to be reality. 

<sup>12.23</sup> Separation is painful only to those who believe it can
occur in truth. What would a child’s rejection or a parent’s death mean
to those who did not believe in separation? Do you believe that God
believes in separation? He knows it not, and because He knows it not, it
does not exist. Because He knows it not, He has not been hurt by it. He
knows no rejection and no death. He knows no pain or sorrow. His son
remains with Him in his eternal home, joined with him as always in
eternal completion. 

<sup>12.24</sup> Yet while the son’s extension into an external world is
quite real, it is all that is truly real within it.  The son could not
create unlike the Father who created everything by extension of Himself.
Neither the Father’s extension, nor the son’s, lessened Father or son in
any way. Replace the word Father with the word Creation and see if this
does not help to make this concept clear. Could Creation’s continuing
extension of itself, its continuing creation, make less of it than what
it started out to be? What we call Father is but creation’s heavenly
face, a personification of what cannot truly be personified. You find it
hard to believe Creation itself can be benevolent and kind, or just
another name for love, but such it is. God is but creation’s starting
point, the creator of creation and yet Creation itself. The Son and Holy
Spirit, like unto Creation, proceeded from the starting point of God.
God is the Son and Holy Spirit’s starting point as well, the Creator of
the Son and Holy Spirit, yet He also is the Son and Holy Spirit. 

<sup>12.25</sup> Now, carry this pattern forward, for the pattern of
God’s extension is the pattern of creation and thus the pattern of the
universe. The son extended himself into creation, and you are that
extension and as holy as is he. The idea of separation only seems to
have made God’s son susceptible to division, and these word symbols are
all that seem to separate Father, Son, and Holy Spirit from Creation or
from each other.

