---
chapter: "6"
title: "Chapter 6: Forgiveness/Joining"
---

<sup>6.1</sup> Joining rests on forgiveness. This you have heard before
without understanding what it is you would forgive. You must forgive
reality for being what it is. Reality, the truly real, is relationship.
You must forgive God for creating a world in which you cannot be alone.
You must forgive God for creating a shared reality before you can
understand it is the only one you would want to have. You have to
forgive this reality for being different than you have always imagined
it to be. You have to forgive yourself for not being able to make it on
your own, because you have realized the impossibility of doing so. You
have to forgive yourself for being what you are, a being who exists only
in relationship. You have to forgive all others for being as you are.
They too cannot be separate, no matter how hard they try. Forgive them.
Forgive yourself. Forgive God. Then you will be ready to begin learning
just how different it really is to live in the reality of relationship.

<sup>6.2</sup> Your brother does not exist apart from you, nor you from
your brother. This is reality. Your mind is not contained within your
body but is one with God and shared equally with all alike. This is
reality.  The heart that is the center of your being is the center of
everything that exists. This is reality. None of these things make you
less than what you have perceived yourself to be, but they do make it
impossible for you to be separate. You can desire what is impossible
until the end of your days but you cannot make it possible. Why not
forgive the world for being other than what you have thought it to be
and begin to learn what it really is? This is what the world is here
for. And when you have learned what it would teach you, you will have
need of it no more, and you will gently let it go and find heaven in its
place. 

<sup>6.3</sup> This is all that the words and symbols and forms and
structures of your world have come to teach you, stated as simply and
directly as is possible. You are neither separate nor alone and never
were and never can be. All your illusions were created in order to
obscure this fact of your existence because you would rather it not be
so. Only when you quit wishing for what cannot be, can you begin to see
what is. 

<sup>6.4</sup> I was least accepted as prophet and savior by those who
were most like me, those who watched me grow, worked alongside my
parents, and lived in the same town. This was because they knew I was
not different from them, and they could not accept that they were the
same as me. They were then, and you are now, no different than I. We are
all the same because we are not separate.  God created the universe as
an interrelated whole. That the universe is an interrelated whole is no
longer disputed even by science. What you have made to hide your reality
has been, with the help of the Holy Spirit, turned into that which will
help you learn what your reality really is. Yet you still refuse to
listen and to learn. You still prefer things to be other than what they
are and, through your preference, choose to keep it so.  

<sup>6.5</sup> Make a new choice! The choice that your heart yearns to
make for you and that your mind is finding increasingly difficult to
deny. When you choose unity over separation, you choose reality over
illusion. You end opposition by choosing harmony. You end conflict by
choosing peace. 

<sup>6.6</sup> All this forgiveness can do for you.  Forgiveness of the
original error—the choice to believe that you are separate despite the
fact that this is not so and cannot ever be. What loving creator would
create a universe in which such a thing could be? A thing alone would be
a thing created without love, for love creates like itself and is
forever one with everything that has been created. This simple
realization will start you on the path to learning what your heart would
have you learn. 

<sup>6.7</sup> The fact that you are not alone in the world shows you
that you are not meant to be alone. Everything here is to help you learn
to perceive correctly, and from there to go beyond perception to the
truth. 

<sup>6.8</sup> What is the opposite of separation but being joined in
relationship?  Everything joined with you in relationship is holy
because of what you are. Every contrast that you see here but points to
this truth. Evil is only seen in relation to good. Chaos is only seen in
relation to peace.  While you see these as separate things you do not
see what the relationship would show you. Contrast demonstrates, which
is why it is a favorite teaching device of the Holy Spirit. Contrast
demonstrates only to reveal the relationship that exists between truth
and illusion. When you chose to deny relationship, you chose a thought
system based on the opposite of your reality. Thus each choice to deny
union reveals its opposite. What is separate from peace is chaos. What
is separate from good is evil. What is separate from the truth is
insane. Since you cannot be separate, all these factors that oppose your
reality exist only in opposition to it. This is what you chose to create
when you chose to pretend you can be what you cannot be. You chose to
live in opposition to the truth, and the opposition is of your making. 

<sup>6.9</sup> Choose again! And let go your fear of what the truth will
bring.  What could be more insane than that which you now call sanity?
What loss can there be in joining with what is so like yourself? It is
only a small step away from where you currently stand, so helpless and
alone. 

<sup>6.10</sup> Yet fear you do, and the maintenance of your fear keeps
you very busy. You stoke its fire lest it go out and leave you to a
warmth not of this world. This is the warmth that you would have, warmth
so all-pervasive no chill of winter need ever arise again.  And yet,
still you choose the fire. You choose the fires of hell to the light of
heaven. Only you can stoke those fires, and this is what makes them
desirable to you. A warmth not of this world, given freely, with no work
involved, causes you to shake your head. How can it be for you if you
cannot put in effort to attain it? And even if it were so, what then?
Some, you think, might choose to live near the equator, to have the sun
shine every day and the need to stoke the fire put behind them.  But not
you. You, you think, prefer the seasons, the cold as well as the warmth,
the snow as well as the rain, the dark of night and the clouds that
block the sun. Without all of these, what would life be? Perpetual
sunshine would be too easy, too lacking in imagination, too sterile. To
have every day the same would be uninteresting now. Perhaps later. Maybe
when you are old and have grown weary of the world. Then perhaps you
will sit in the sun. 

<sup>6.11</sup> This is the heaven of your mind, the meaning you give to
joining, the face you put on eternal peace. With such a vision in your
mind it is no wonder that you choose it not, or that you put it off
until the end of your days. A heaven such as this would be for the old
and the infirm, the ones ready to leave the world, those who have
already grown worn out from it. What fun would such a heaven be for
those of you still young and full of vigor? Those still willing to face
another battle? Those who have not yet faced every challenge? If there
is a mountain left to climb, why choose heaven? Surely it can be chosen
later when disease has taken your limbs’ use from your control and your
mind no longer races forward to what is next. 

<sup>6.12</sup> Eagerness for life and eagerness for heaven are seen to
be in opposition. Heaven and its milieu of eternal peace is rightly
kept, you think, for the end of life, and so you scream at the
unfairness when a young one leaves the world. Heaven is not for the
young, you say. How unfair that those who die young have not had a
chance at life, a chance to face the struggle and the challenge, the
coming of the new day and the dying of the old. How sad they have not
had the opportunity to stand separate and alone and to become what they
would become. What they are is no more valued than what you are. What is
still to come is what you live for, with the undying hope that it will
not be that which came before. For every challenge faced is but a call
to face the next. And each one comes to replace the old with hope that
this one will be the one—and equal hope that it will not. 

<sup>6.13</sup> To succeed is but a little death from which you must
hurry on to where the challenge of a new success and new reason to exist
awaits.  The carrot of fulfillment you hold before yourself when grasped
is quickly eaten and life feeds on itself once again. Just as you eat to
still your hunger only to become hungry again, so does the rest of your
life need this constant maintenance to retain the reality you have given
it. “Struggle to succeed and succeed to struggle yet another day” is the
life you have made, and the life you fear heaven would replace. To give
up the idea that this is where meaning is found, fulfillment attained,
happiness birthed amongst sorrow, is seen as giving up. Heaven’s help is
most called upon for just this time, this time when giving up is close,
for never do you feel more in need of help than when all your plans have
failed and giving up becomes an alternative more attractive than
carrying on. 

<sup>6.14</sup> Few ask for the grace to give up what has been for what
could be.  For giving up is seen as failure, and here is what you fear
the most. To not succeed at life would indeed be a failure if it were
possible for it to be so. Yet even this possibility you would cling to,
for with no chance of failure is no chance of success, or so you reason.
The contrast that you have come to see in your separated state makes
only either/or situations possible. While a choice for heaven is indeed
a choice to renounce hell, while truth is indeed a choice to renounce
illusion, these are the only real choices that exist, and they do not
extend into your illusions but only into truth. For in truth are all
illusions gone, in heaven is all thought of hell forever vanquished.

<sup>6.15</sup> How can I convince you that peace is what you want when
you do not know what peace is? Those who once worshiped golden calves
did so because they knew of no other choice. A god of love was as
foreign a concept to them as is a life of peace to you. What is foreign
to the world has changed, but the world has not. Those who live with war
seek peace. Those who live with failure seek success. Put another way,
both are saying this: you seek to make sense of an insane world, to find
meaning within meaninglessness, purpose among the purposeless. 

<sup>6.16</sup> How can I make peace attractive to you who know it not?
The Bible says, “The sun shines and the rain falls on the good and evil
alike.” Why then do you think that peace is endless sunshine? Peace is
merely enjoyment of the rain and sun, night as well as day. Without
judgment cast upon it, peace shines on all that you would look upon, as
well as every situation you would face. 

<sup>6.17</sup> Situations too are relationships. When peace enters your
relationships, situations, too, are what they are meant to be and seen
in heaven’s holy light. No longer do situations pit one against another,
making it impossible for anyone to achieve what they would achieve. The
challenge now is in creation rather than accomplishment.  With peace,
accomplishment is achieved in the only place where it makes any sense to
desire it. With your accomplishment comes the freedom and the challenge
of creation. Creation becomes the new frontier, the occupation of those
too young to rest, too interested in living still to welcome the peace
of dying. Those who could not change the world one iota through their
constant effort, in peace create the world anew.

<sup>6.18</sup> Here they find the loveliest of answers to their
questions. It takes not time nor money nor the sweat of their brow to
change the world: it takes only love. A forgiven world is whole, and in
its wholeness one with you. It is here, in wholeness, that peace abides
and heaven is. It is from wholeness that heaven waits for you. 

<sup>6.19</sup> Think about this now—for how could heaven be a separate
place? A piece of geography distinct from all the rest? How could it not
encompass everything and still be what it is: home to God’s beloved son
and dwelling place of God Himself? It is because God is not separate
from anything that you cannot be. It is because God is not separate from
anything that heaven is where you are. It is because God is love that
all your relationships are holy, and from them you can find the way to
Him and to your holy Self. 

<sup>6.20</sup> Are your relationships with those you love severed when
they leave this world? Do you not still think of them? And do you not
still think of them as who they were in life? What is the difference, in
your mind, between who they were and who they are after death? In
honesty will you admit an envy, an awareness that they still exist, but
without the pain and burden of the body, without the limits placed upon
those who remain?  You imagine them still in bodily form, perhaps, yet
you imagine them happy and at peace. Even those who claim not to believe
in God or an afterlife of any sort will, when prompted to be truthful,
admit this is an image that lights their mind with peace and hope. This
image is as ancient as the earth and sky and all that lies beyond it. It
did not arise from fantasy, nor did it pass from one mind to the next as
stories often will. It is but part of your awareness of who you are, an
awareness you would deny in favor of thoughts of death so grim they make
of life a nightmare. 

<sup>6.21</sup> It is your denial of all your happy thoughts that has
led you to a life of such unhappiness. Thoughts of terror and of sin you
will embrace, but thoughts of resurrection and new life you still before
they have a chance at birth and call them wishful thinking.  What harm
do you expect happy thoughts to do to you? At best you see them as
delusional.  But what you fear is disappointment. All that you have
wished for and have not acquired within your life is the evidence you
would use to deny yourself hope of any kind. You do not understand the
difference between wishing for what can never be and accepting what is. 

<sup>6.22</sup> The world cannot fail to disappoint you, for your
conception of it is based upon deception. You have deceived only
yourself, and your deception has not changed what is nor will it ever
succeed in doing so.  Only God and His appointed helpers can lead you
from this self-deception to the truth. You have been so successful at
deception that you no longer can see the light unaided. But join your
brother and the light begins to shine, for all are here to aid you. This
is the purpose of the world and of love most kind: to end your
self-deception and return you to the light.

