---
chapter: "23"
title: "Chapter 23: The Freedom of the Body"
---

23.1 Knowing and love are inseparable. When this is realized, it is
obvious that love is the only true wisdom, the only true understanding,
the only true knowing. Love is the great teacher. And your loving
relationships the means of learning love. 

23.2 The lessons learned from love will go a long way in assuaging your
remaining fears about the loss of your individuality that you believe
will accompany the loss of your separated self. For, as each of you has
found as you have loved another, the more you love and long to possess a
loved one, the more you realize that your loved one cannot be possessed.
While in a love relationship the greatest knowing is sought and, with
willing partners, attained; one’s partner in such a relationship still
transcends complete knowing.  The relationship becomes the known. While
it is your nature to seek for more, it is also the nature of life to
exist in relationship and to become known through relationship. This is
how knowing comes to be.  Knowing through relationship is not a “second
best” situation. It is how life is. It is how love is. 

23.3 Thus, while your partner in love transcends total knowing, this too
is “how it is.” How it is meant to be. Love inviolate. Each of you is
love inviolate. Yet relationally, you may be able to “read each other’s
thoughts,” be cognizant of the slightest switch in mood, finish each
other’s sentences. You know the other would lay down his or her life for
you, rise to any occasion of your need, share your every fear and joy. 

23.4 Non-partnered love also shares a knowing through relationship. The
loved one may be on the other side of the country, separated by
distance, or previous choices, or past hurts, and yet a relationship
continues. 

23.5 In both partnered and non-partnered love relationships, the one you
come to know, the only one who does not transcend total knowing, is your
Self. 

23.6 The same is true of your relationship with God. As in any love
relationship, the desire to know God can be all consuming. Yet, while
God transcends knowing, your relationship with God is how you know both
God and your Self.

23.7 Let me remind you of a key learning aid discussed some pages back:
*You would not be other than you are*. No matter how much you grow to love
another, that love does not cause you to want to *be* the other person.
That love causes you to want to have a *relationship* with the other
person. This should tell you something about the nature of love.

23.8 When obsessively in love you may want the other person to be you,
but rarely the other way around. This is what has caused you to make God
over in your own image and to try to do the same to others. This comes
of seeing oneself as room. This is not relationship. When you are
tempted to think of relationship having to do with physical proximity,
think of this example. Now imagine communities of faith. Around the
world, people are united in belief, and not only in religious beliefs.
Ideology, politics, profession unite people. “Parties” and
“associations” are formed to foster the idea of unity through shared
belief. They are not necessary, as is seen by the reality that they only
form after the fact. The belief fosters the form and the form is then
meant to foster the belief. 

23.10 This is true of the body as well. Think of the way in which the
word *body* is used and this will be clear. The *body* politic. A *body* of
knowledge. Belief fostered the form and the form was meant to foster the
belief. Thus belief and form have a symbiotic relationship.
Understanding of this *loving* relationship can help you to experience
freedom of the body, which is an extension, in form, of your belief in
the personal “I.” 

23.11 Belief fosters union. Union does not foster belief, because in
unity belief is no longer required. Belief fostered the union of atoms
and cells into the form required by the belief in the separated self.
Belief of another kind can foster the creation of form of another kind. 

23.12 If form is an extension of belief you can see why what you believe
is critical to how you live with form.  We are speaking here of ways of
thinking similar to those which you term induction and deduction. In the
past, exercises have most often begun with an alteration of beliefs
regarding form. Here we have taken an opposite approach, beginning with
exercises to alter your belief in your identity and concluding with
exercises to alter your belief in form.  This is consistent with our
primary focus on learning from the heart.  The mind goes from the small
to the large, the heart from the large to the small. Only the
wholehearted see the connection of all. 

23.13 I repeat: *Belief of another kind can foster the creation of form
of another kind.* A wholehearted belief in the truth about your Self is
what is required to cause this to be so. It is what is necessary now. It
will change the world. 

23.14 *Belief of another kind* is what miracles are all about. It is what
you are all about as a miracle worker. For you to change your beliefs is
the miracle that we are after, the result we seek from this Course. 

23.15 Obviously, your belief in who and what you are is the basis for
your entire foundation, a foundation previously built on fear. Clearly,
belief in the body was easily translated into a belief in the validity
of fear. When you are free of this misperception, this inaccurate
belief, your body will be freed. It will no longer be an object of use
but a means of service. 

23.16 Freeing your perception from your nearly immutable belief in form
will allow for all changes in form required by the miracle. Form is not
a constant but a result. While you believe that belief is the result of
form, it is not. Form is the result of belief. Thus belief is not only
capable of changing form but also is necessary in order to do so. 

23.17 History has shown you that what you believe is possible becomes
possible. Science has proven the link between researcher and research
findings. Still you find it difficult to believe that what is possible
depends upon what you can imagine being possible. You must cease to see
the difficulty and begin to see the ease with which what you can imagine
becomes reality. 

23.18 You have no capabilities that do not serve you, because they were
created to serve you. The ability to imagine is such a capability,
freely and equally given to all. Imagination is linked to true vision,
for it exercises the combined capabilities of mind and heart. It is akin
to perception, and can lead the way in changing how you perceive of
yourself and the world around you. 

23.19 Beyond imagination is the spark that allows you to conceive of
what never was conceived of before. This spark is inspiration, the
infusion of spirit. Taking the creation of form backward, it leads to
this conclusion: Spirit precedes inspiration, inspiration precedes
imagination, imagination precedes belief, and belief precedes form. 

23.20 Spirit is your more direct link with the one Source. Spirit is
directly from the Source, while form is a by-product of spirit. Thus
form is once removed, or further away from the Source.  Again working
backward, however, the form you have created is still a step necessary
in the return to the Source. The necessary step is that of moving beyond
form—recognizing and acknowledging form for what it is and then
continuing on, working backward to change your belief, to allow
imagination to serve you and spirit to fill you. 

23.21 You then can move forward again, taking form beyond its given
parameters and becoming a miracle worker. 

23.22 The body encompasses or holds the belief. It is the composite of
your beliefs, the totality. It will continue to hold former beliefs as
well as new beliefs until old beliefs are purged. The purging of old
beliefs frees space for the new. It allows your form to reflect what and
who you are now in terms that coincide with the “you” whom you have
always been. 

23.23 There is no quick route to this purging, as it is the most
individual of accomplishments. As you learned your beliefs, you must
unlearn your beliefs. As you begin the process of unlearning you may
feel tested. You are not being tested but given opportunities for
unlearning. To learn that a previously held belief is no longer valid is
the only way to truly purge that belief. 

23.24 These learning opportunities call for a period of engagement with
life. Many of you will have begun to experience unlearning opportunities
even while your study of this Course may have led you to turn inward and
attempt to disengage from life. A period of engagement with life cannot
be avoided, however, and your attempts to avoid it will only cause an
increase in feelings generated by experiences of duality. While you hold
conflicting beliefs within you, you will be conflicted and affected by
polarity.  Unlearning allows you to purge old beliefs so that only one
set of beliefs is operative within you. This is the only route to the
certainty you seek, and leads to true conviction. True conviction cannot
be attained without this experience of unlearning and purging. 

23.25 All unlearning opportunities are opportunities for miracle
readiness. There is no trick to identifying unlearning opportunities.
From this point forward, I assure you, all experiences will be thus
until unlearning is no longer needed. If you will remember that the one
exercise for your mind is dedicating all thought to union, you will keep
your mind engaged and less resistant to unlearning. When you feel
resistance—and of course your mind will resist unlearning what it has
striven to learn—return your dedication to union. Acknowledge your
mind’s resistance as a sign that unlearning is going on. Acknowledge it
but do not engage it.

23.26 What will happen when you look at each situation as a challenge to
your beliefs? If you do not remember that you are involved in a process
of unlearning that will lead to the conviction you have so long sought,
you will indeed feel tested and will try to take control of the learning
situation. Not taking control, however, is the key to unlearning. What
you term as *being in control* is simply another way of saying *acting on
old beliefs*. As long as you attempt to remain in control, old beliefs
will not be purged. 

23.27 Attempting to exert control over learning situations is a
reflection of belief that you have nothing to learn. An attitude of
openness is required for unlearning and new learning both.  Control
opposes openness. Mastery comes through the process of both unlearning
and learning anew. This is but another way of stating that which was
stated in *A Course in Miracles*: Resign as your own teacher.  The desire
to control is the desire to remain your own teacher and/or to choose
your teachers and learning situations. Neither can occur if you would
truly choose to change your beliefs and move on to the new or the truth. 

23.28 Looked at in another way, this process has much in common with
forgiveness. The action associated with it raises it to a level similar
to that of atonement. It is an undoing accompanied by a new means of
doing. In the process of unlearning, both forgiveness and atonement
occur. You recognize that your false beliefs were the result of faulty
learning. As unlearning is replaced by new learning, judgment falls away
as your innocence is established. Can a child be found guilty when the
child has not yet learned that which is needed for right action? 

23.29 You might ask, how do you learn what you have failed to learn
previously? What are the lessons? What is the curriculum? How will you
know when you have achieved a learning objective? Yet how can you become
a master of what another would teach? Of lessons another would select?
Your life must become your teacher, and you its devoted pupil.  Here is
a curriculum designed specifically for you, a curriculum only you can
master. Only your own life experiences have led to the learning you have
accumulated and translated into beliefs. Only your own life experiences
will reverse the process.

