---
chapter: "3"
title: "Chapter 3: The First Lesson"
---

<sup>3.1</sup> Love is. It teaches by being what it is. It does not do
anything. It does not strive. It neither succeeds nor fails. It is
neither alive nor dead. And thus it always was and always will be. It is
not particular to you as human beings. It *is* in relationship to
everything. All to all.

<sup>3.2</sup> Just as true knowledge cannot be learned, love cannot be
learned, and you cannot be learned. All that you desire and cannot learn
is already accomplished. It is accomplished in you. It is you. Imagine
the ocean or the cheetah, the sun or the moon or God Himself, attempting
to learn what they are. They are the same as you. All exist within you.
You are the universe itself. 

<sup>3.3</sup> It is a shared universe with no divisions. There are no
sections, no parts, no inside and no outside, no dreams and no illusions
that can escape or hide, disappear, or cease to be. There is no human
condition that does not exist in all humans. It is completely impossible
for one to have what another does not have. All is shared.  This has
always been true and is endlessly true. Truth is truth. There are no
degrees of truth. 

<sup>3.4</sup> You are not form, nor is your real world.  You seek the
face of God in form as you seek for love in form. Both love and God are
there, but they are not the form that your body’s eyes see.  Just as
these words you see upon this page are symbols only of meaning far
beyond what the symbols can suggest, so too is everything and everyone
around you, those you see and those you only can imagine. To seek the
“face” of God, even in the form of Christ, is to seek for what is
forever without form. To truly see is to begin to see the formless.  To
begin to see the formless is to begin to understand what you are.

<sup>3.5</sup> All that you now see are but symbols of what is really
there before you, in glory beyond your deepest imaginings. Yet you
persist in wanting only what your eyes can see and hands can hold. You
call these things real and all else unreal. You can close your eyes and
believe that you are in the dark, but you will not believe that you are
no longer real.  Close your eyes on all that you have become accustomed
to seeing. And you will see the light. 

<sup>3.6</sup> In the light that comes only to eyes that no longer see,
you will find the Christ who abides in you. In Jesus Christ, the Son of
God became the son of man. He walked the world with a face much like
your own, a body with two legs and two arms, ten fingers and ten toes.
And yet you know this was not Jesus, nor is this a picture of the
Christ.  Jesus gave a face to love, as you do here as well. But love did
not attach itself to form and say, “This is what I am.” How can anything
have a form except in symbols? A family crest, a mother’s ring, a
wedding band are all the same: They but represent what they symbolize in
form. 

<sup>3.7</sup> There is no form that is not thus. A form is but a
representation.  You see a thousand forms a day with different names and
different functions and you think not that they are all the same. You
place values on each one based on usefulness or pleasant appearance, on
popularity or on reputation. Each one you place in relationship to
yourself, and so you do not even see the form as it is but only as what
it will do for you. You imprison form within your meaning, and still
your meaning is truer than its form. You give all meaning to everything,
and thus you populate your world with angels and with demons, their
status determined by who would help you and who would thwart you. Thus
do you determine your friends and your enemies, and thus you have
friends who become enemies and enemies who become friends. While a
pencil may essentially remain a pencil in your judgment, at least as
long as it has all the qualities that you have determined that a pencil
should have, few people can exhibit the qualities you have predetermined
that they should possess at all times and in all places. And so one
disappoints and another enthralls, one champions your cause and another
denigrates you.  In all scenarios you remain the maker of your world,
giving it its causes and effects. If this can be so, how can the world
be anything but symbolic, with each symbol’s meaning chosen by you and
for you. Nothing is what it is, but only what it is to you. 

<sup>3.8</sup> Into this rank confusion is brought a simple statement:
*Love is*.  Never changing, symbolizing only itself, how can it fail to
be everything or to contain all meaning? No form can encompass it for it
encompasses all form. Love is the light in which form disappears and all
that is, is seen as it is.

<sup>3.9</sup> You who are looking for help wonder now how this would
help you.  What is there left to say that has not been said? What are
these words but symbols, by my own admission? It is in what they
symbolize that help arrives. You do not need to believe in the words nor
the potential of the exercises to change your life, for these words
enter you as what they are, not the symbols that they represent. An idea
of love is planted now, in a garden rich with what will make it grow.

<sup>3.10</sup> Everything has birth in an idea, a thought, a
conception.  Everything that has been manifested in your world was first
conceived within the mind. While you know this is true, you continue to
believe you are the effect and not the cause. This is partially due to
your concept of the mind. What you conceive it to be, it will be to you.
While many teachings have attempted to dislodge this concept that you
hold so dear, because you use the mind to deal in concepts, you have
been unable to let new learning have its effect. This is because you
believe your mind is in control of what it thinks. You believe in a
process of input and output, all completely human and scientifically
provable. The birth of an idea is thus the result of what has come
before, of seeing something old as new, of improving on a former idea,
of taking various information and collecting it into a new
configuration. 

<sup>3.11</sup> What has this meant for learning that is not of this
world? It means that you filter it through the same lens. You think of
it in the same way. You seek to gather it together so that it will
provide an improvement to what has been before.  You look for evidence
that shows that if you behave in a certain way certain things will
happen as a result. Like a child learning not to touch a stove because
it is hot and a burn will result, or learning that a warm blanket is
comforting, you subject it to a thousand tests dependent on your senses
and your judgment. While you believe you know what will hurt you and
what you will find comforting, you subject what cannot be compared to
the comparable. 

<sup>3.12</sup> Think not that your mind as you conceive of it learns
without comparison. Everything is true or false, right or wrong, black
or white, hot or cold, based solely on contrast. One chemical reacts one
way and one reacts another, and it is only in the study of the two that
you believe learning takes place.

<sup>3.13</sup> You have not given up the idea that you are in control
of what you learn, nor have you accepted that you can learn in a way
that you have not learned before. Thus we move from head to heart to
take advantage of your concepts of the heart, concepts much more in line
with learning that is not of this world. 

<sup>3.14</sup> These words of love do not enter your body through your
eyes and take up residence in your brain, there to be distilled into a
language that you can understand. As you read, be aware of your heart,
for this is where this learning enters and will stay.  Your heart is now
your eyes and ears. Your mind can remain within your concept of the
brain, for we bypass it now and send it no information to process, no
data for it to compute. The only change in thinking you are asked to
make is to realize that you do not need it. 

<sup>3.15</sup> What this will mean to you goes far beyond the learning
of this Course. One such concept, given up and not replaced, will free
you beyond your deepest imaginings and free your sisters and brothers as
well. Once one such concept is felled, others follow quickly. But none
is more entrenched than this one, the one we begin today to let fall
away. 

<sup>3.16</sup> You who have been unable to separate mind from body,
brain from head, and intelligence from knowledge, take heart. We give up
trying. We simply learn in a new way and in our learning realize that
our light shines from within our heart, our altar to the Lord. Here the
Christ in us abides and here we concentrate our energies and our
learning, soon to learn that what we would know cannot be computed in
the databanks of an overworked and over-trusted brain, a mind we cannot
separate from where we believe it to be. 

<sup>3.17</sup> Our hearts, in contrast, go out to the world, to the
suffering, to the weak of body and of mind. Our hearts are not so easily
contained within the casing of our flesh and bone. Our hearts take wing
with joy and break with sadness. Not so the brain that keeps on
registering it all, a silent observer, soon to tell you that the
feelings of your heart were foolishness indeed. It is to our hearts that
we appeal for guidance, for there resides the one who truly guides.

<sup>3.18</sup> You who think this idea is rife with sentiment, sure to
lead you to abandoning logic, and thereafter certainly to cause your
ruin, I say to you again: take heart. Such foolishness as your heart’s
desires will save you now. Remember it is your heart that yearns for
home. Your heart that yearns for love remembered. Your heart that leads
the way that, should you follow, will set you certainly on the path for
home. 

<sup>3.19</sup> What pain has your heart endured that it has failed to
treasure for its source? Its source is love, and what greater proof need
you of love’s strength? Such pain as has your heart endured would surely
be a knife to cut through tissue, a blow that to the brain would stop
all functioning, an attack upon the cells far greater than any cancer.
The pain of love, so treasured that it cannot be let go, can and does
indeed attack the tissue, brain, and cells. And then you call it illness
and allow the body to let you down, still and always holding love unto
yourself.

<sup>3.20</sup> Must pain accompany love and loss? Is this the price you
pay, you ask, for opening up your heart? And yet, should you be asked if
you would have other than this love, you would not answer yes. What else
is worth such cost, such suffering, so many tears? What else would you
not let go when pain comes near, as a hand would drop a burning ember?
What other pain would you hold closely, a grief not to be given up? What
other pain would you be so unwilling to sacrifice? 

<sup>3.21</sup> Think not that these are senseless questions, made to
bring love and pain together and there to leave you unaided and
unhelped, for pain and love kept together in this way makes no sense,
and yet makes the greatest sense of all.  These questions merely prove
love’s value. What else do you value more?

<sup>3.22</sup> Your thoughts might lead you to a dozen answers now,
more for some and less for others, your answers depending on the
tenacity of your thoughts, which, led by your ego, would throw logic in
love’s way. Some others might use their thoughts in yet another manner,
claiming to choose love and not pain when what they really choose is
safety at love’s expense. No one here believes they can have one without
the other and so they live in fear of love, all the while desiring it
above all else. 

<sup>3.23</sup> Think you not that love can be kept apart from life in
any way. But we begin now to take life’s judgment from it, the judgments
gained by your experience, judgment based on how much love you have
received and how much love has been withheld from you. We begin by
simply accepting the proof we have been given of love’s strength. For
this we will return to again and again as we learn to recognize what
love is.

