---
chapter: "29"
title: "Chapter 29: Attention"
---

<sup>29.1</sup> To attend is to be present and to be of service. This is
the meaning of which we speak when we ask for a commitment to life that
requires your attention. It is both a request for focus and readiness
and a request for service that can only be given in the present by a
mind and heart available to the requirements of the present. It is the
appropriate attitude for the time of tenderness, as it is an attitude of
ministry. 

<sup>29.2</sup> Your function cannot be known to you while you shy away
from the idea of service. Whether you realize it or not, you associate
service with subjugation, particularly the idea of service to a higher
Will or higher Cause. Some of you associate it with a lack of free will,
a lack of choice, a course that will lead you to a subservient stature.
Others think of it in terms of charity, and continue to see a difference
between those who would serve and those who would be served. Few of you
have as yet integrated this Course’s definition of service into your
lives. But now you shall. For you cannot bring the learning you have
done here into an engagement with life and not realize the true meaning
of service, or in contrast, the true meaning of use. 

<sup>29.3</sup> You who have so worried over what to do have both
welcomed and feared the idea of some kind of service being required of
you. There is no mystery to this, as the idea of service in your society
is one of enforced duty, as exemplified by your military service. You
have no notion, as did people of the past, of being of service to God.
This is a symptom of the reign of the ego and its ability to both
aggrandize your notion of yourself, and to minimize it. To be of service
to God is not to be a slave to God but to attend to God. To give God
your attention and your care. You who would cry, *God make use of me*,
only need to give to God your devotion and your willingness to serve
instead of use. 

<sup>29.4</sup> Further, you need to let the universe be of service to
you rather than trying to use the universe to accomplish your goals.
These adjustments in your attitude toward service will bring about the
completion of the cycle of giving and receiving, and the beginning of
wholeness. 

<sup>29.5</sup> This is as true for your own goal of wholeheartedness as
it is for any wider goal of unity, for they are the same goal.
Wholeheartedness is unity regained. Your return to unity is your return
to your full power and your ability to be of quite literal service to
God and your brothers and sisters. 

<sup>29.6</sup> If God were to speak to you Himself and tell you of what
means your service would be to Him, He would but tell you this: *My
child, return to me*. God has no Will apart from yours. Your return to
unity is all God seeks for you, for Himself, and for all His children.
The return to unity was my accomplishment, and all that is meant by what
I have often repeated here: Only you can be accomplished. Your service
is but dedication to this goal.  

<sup>29.7</sup> My return to unity accomplished this goal for all, for
all are one in me and one in unity. This is why you have no need to
concern yourself with anything other than this goal. Your realization of
this goal’s accomplishment is your realization of your divinity, a state
unaltered and yet in need of your recognition and return. 

<sup>29.8</sup> While this goal may at first appear to be one of selfish
intent and individual gain, it is not. A return to unity is a return to
unity. From within the center, the core of unity, your accomplishment
goes out to the world, as mine once did. 

<sup>29.9</sup> The time of tenderness is the time of your approach to
unity. The atonement that is accomplished here is the means of opening
the gate to your approach. No one has closed this gate to you, but you
by your own hand pulled it shut as you departed your heavenly home, and
you do not remember that your own hand can open it once again.  It is a
gate of illusion, of mist, of clouds before the sun. Your hand is
outstretched now and your light is clearing away the mist. The gateway
to unity stands before you, an arch of golden light beneath a rainbow
vibrant with the colors of life. Life, not death, assures your approach.
God Himself will guide your entry. 

<sup>29.10</sup> Many of you have noticed the consistency with which you
have glorified falsely that which you would imitate from creation. In
work too you will find an example of this. For you all know that work
and service somehow go together. In many cultures has work thus been
glorified and made to seem as if it is the proper use of a life. And
yet, as your Father’s child, your work is as His. Your work is that of
creation. Your creation is your service to the world as your Father’s
work is His service to you. As you cannot imagine God toiling, so you
should cease to imagine your Self doing thus. 

<sup>29.11</sup> Many of you think of life itself as toil. There is much
you need to do just to stay alive, and if a thing is required, expected,
necessary, your tendency is to rebel against it and to seek for ease in
getting it done or ways to avoid doing it at all. Thus have your paper
plates and dishwashers taken the ritual from a meal, your
mass-manufacturing the satisfaction of the hand-made. While this is
neither good nor bad, this attitude of life as toil is part of your
rebellion against ideas of service. You have no time for more than you
do now, and you think of service, if you think of it at all, as
something to be fit in here or there where it is convenient in your busy
schedule. 

<sup>29.12</sup> It is extremely important for you to realize that God’s
work takes place outside of time, as do all acts of true service or
creation. This is not a readily understandable concept, but one that is
necessary for you to have faith in. It is essential to your release of
the concept of toil and your acceptance of your function here. 

<sup>29.13</sup> No matter how busy your schedule, it is only a schedule
in terms of your perception of it. Your *schedule* is just another way
of saying your *life*, and an alternative view of how you look at your
life, when seen thus, is absolutely necessary. 

<sup>29.14</sup> No wholeness will be possible for you while you look at
life in terms of schedules, plans, time-tables, or things to get done.
No wholeness will be possible for you while you compartmentalize your
life into designated pieces giving yourself time for work and time for
leisure and seeing them not as the same thing.  Life is life. Life is.
As love is.  

<sup>29.15</sup> Life is service to God. God is service to life. You are
God in life. Thus you are both life and service to life, both God and
service to God. All of the vast universe was created the same: to live
and to serve life, to be of God and be of service to God. To be served
and to serve. To be provided for and to provide. To have needs met and
to meet needs. This circular nature of the universe leaves no one
unattended.  Yet you realize this not.

<sup>29.16</sup> The separation but accentuated this manner of
functioning and made of it something difficult and challenging,
something to be changed. The separation accentuated this manner of
functioning and made of it, as of the rest of creation, something that
it is not. The separation accentuated this manner of functioning, but it
did not create it. Life exists in service to itself. This could also be
stated thus: Life exists in relationship. Relationship is the
interaction within which service occurs. The replacement of the idea of
service with the idea of use made for the existence of special
relationships. The idea of use created all ideas of toil as the only
means of having needs met. The idea of use created all notions of
distrust, starting with—as we have stated before—your ideas of using the
very body you call your home rather than allowing it to serve you. 

<sup>29.17</sup> The universe exists in reciprocal relationship or holy
relationship, rather than special relationship.  This is the nature of
existence, as unity is the nature of existence and cannot be changed and
has not changed, although you believe it not. It is a joyful
relationship, as the nature of relationship is joy. Once you have given
up your belief in separation this will be known to you.

<sup>29.18</sup> The choice to change your belief is before you. Are you
not ready to make it? 

<sup>29.19</sup> As you once chose separation you can now choose unity.
Not knowing that unity was a choice prevented you from making this
choice before now. Now I tell you clearly, the choice is yours. Choose
once again. 

<sup>29.20</sup> As you make your choice, remember your choice must be
wholehearted, for it is in wholeheartedness that the power of choice
exists. A split mind and heart can prevent you from utilizing the power
of choice, but it cannot prevent you from claiming this choice as your
own. Choose anew and let the power of heaven come together to seal the
rift between your mind and heart, and make you whole once again.

<sup>29.21</sup> Claiming your identity and your power to make choices
is an act that comes from an entirely different place than
decision-making.  Claiming is akin to prayer and is but an asking, an
asking for your true inheritance. You have felt that you need to know
for what it is you ask.  And yet you cannot know until you inherit. Can
you have faith that your true inheritance is what you truly desire, even
knowing not exactly what that inheritance is? Can you not follow me in
my choice and accept it as your own? 

<sup>29.22</sup> You who have so long been afraid to claim your smallest
gifts, look again at claiming with the definition I have provided.
Claiming is also contrary to how you have perceived of it in terms of
claiming something for your own: You claim not to own or to separate
what you have from what another has and then to call it special. You
claim in order to reclaim your Self. 

<sup>29.23</sup> How can one’s talent cause another to be less talented?
How can one’s service deprive anyone else of the right to serve? No two
are alike. Only in God are all the same.

<sup>29.24</sup> This is the great divide, the separation, between the
visible and the invisible, the indivisible and the divisible. Only those
reunited with God achieve the state of unity. Only the state of unity
exists.

<sup>29.25</sup> Your gifts, your talents, your uniqueness, are your
service. Can you not look at them thus? And can you not come to
understand the reciprocal nature of giftedness? That what God has given
only needs to be received? That what you have received only needs to be
given? The indivisibleness of God is simply this: an unbroken chain of
giving and receiving. Thus is this a definition of unity as well. 

<sup>29.26</sup> Service is but another way of stating this law of
creation, this unbroken chain of giving and receiving. All your worry
over the future and the past is but a worry about the return of gifts
given. What gift of opportunity did you not accept in the past, might
you not recognize in the future? What gift of fortune, what chance
encounter, what decision might have changed your life? What should you
have done that you didn’t? What might you do in the future if not for
your fear of where the direction you choose might take you? What peace
might you know if you realized, truly realized, that all gifts come but
once and are forever? The past nor the future matter not. All is
available in the here and now where giving and receiving occur. 

<sup>29.27</sup> No chance to learn or grow is ever missed. Each still
exists, though not in time. Each still exists, but in the present.  Can
you replace your attention to the past and future with an attention to
the present?

