---
chapter: "4"
title: "Chapter 4: Love’s Equity"
---

<sup>4.1</sup> Do you have to love God to know what love is? When you
love purely, you know God whether you realize it or not. What does it
mean to love purely? It means to love for love’s sake. To simply love.
To have no false idols. 

<sup>4.2</sup> False idols must be brought to light and there seen as
the nothing that they are before you can love for love’s sake. What is a
false idol?  What you think love will get you. You are entitled to all
that love would give but not to what you think love will provide for you
through its acquisition. This is a classic example of not recognizing
that *love is*. 

<sup>4.3</sup> Love and longing are so intimately attached because they
joined together at the moment of separation when a choice to go away
from love and a choice to return were birthed in unison. Love was thus
not ever lost but shadowed over by longing that, placed between you and
your Source, both obscured Its light and alerted you of Its eternal
presence.  Longing is your proof of love’s existence, for even here you
would not long for what is not remembered. 

<sup>4.4</sup> All your long search for proof of God’s existence ends
here when you recognize what love is. And with this proof is proof of
your existence established as well. For in your longing for love, you
recognize as well your longing for your Self.  Why would you wonder who
you are and what your purpose here is all about, if not for your
recognition, given witness by your longing, of what you fear you are
not, but surely are? 

<sup>4.5</sup> All fear ends when proof of your existence is
established. All fear is based on your inability to recognize love and
thus who you are and who God is. How could you not have been fearful
with doubt as powerful as this? How can you not rejoice when doubt is
gone and love fills all the space that doubt once occupied? No shadows
linger when doubt is gone. Nothing stands between the child of God and
the child’s own Source. There remain no clouds to block the sun, and
night gives way to day. 

<sup>4.6</sup> Child of God, you are alien here but need not be alien to
your Self.  In your knowledge of your Self, all threat of time and space
and place dissolves. You may still walk an alien land, but not in a fog
of amnesia that obscures what would be a brief adventure and replaces it
with dreams of terror and confusion so rampant that no toehold of
security is possible, and day turns endlessly into night in a long march
toward death. Recognize who you are and God’s light goes before you,
illuminating every path and shining away the fog of dreams from which
you waken undisturbed. 

<sup>4.7</sup> Love alone has the power to turn this dream of death into
a waking awareness of life eternal. 

<sup>4.8</sup> Yearning, learning, seeking, acquiring, the need to own,
the need to keep, the grasping call, the driving force, the chosen
passion—all these things that you have made to replace what you already
have will lead you back as surely as they can lead you astray. Where
what you have made will lead rests only on your decision. Your decision,
couched in many forms, is simply this: to proceed toward love or to
withdraw from it, to believe it is given or withheld. 

<sup>4.9</sup> Love is all that follows the law of God in your world.
All else assumes that what one has is denied another. While love cannot
be learned nor practiced, there is a practice we must do in order to
recognize love’s presence. We practice living by the law of love, a law
of gain not loss, a law that says the more you give the more you gain. 

<sup>4.10</sup> There are no losers and no winners under God’s law. Not
one is given more than another. God cannot love you more than your
neighbor, nor can you earn more of God’s love than you have, or a better
place in heaven. The mind, under the ego’s direction, has thrived on
winners and on losers, on striving for and earning a better place. The
heart knows not these distinctions, and those who think their hearts
have learned them by being battered and abused by their experience here,
rejoice in knowing that it is not so.  This seeming illusion is believed
in because your mind has made it so.  Your thoughts have reviewed and
reviewed again all the pain that love has brought. It dwells on those
occasions when love has failed because it does not recognize that love
cannot fail. 

<sup>4.11</sup> Your expectations and false perceptions of your brothers
and sisters are what have caused you to believe that love can fail, be
lost, withdrawn, or turned to hate.  Your false perception of your
Father is what has caused all other perceptions to be false, including
the one you hold of your own Self.

<sup>4.12</sup> When you think of acting out of love, your thoughts of
love are based on sentiment and must be challenged. Love is not being
nice when you are feeling surly. Love is not doing good deeds of charity
and service. Love is not throwing logic to the wind and acting in
foolish ways that pass as gaiety but cannot masquerade as joy. You each
have an image in your mind of someone you believe knows what love is.
This is perhaps an elderly person who is always kind and gentle, with no
cross word for anyone, and no concern for his or her own self. This is
perhaps a mother whose love is blind and self-sacrificing. Still others
of you might imagine a couple long married in which each person is
devoted to the other’s happiness, or a father whose love is
unconditional, or a priest or minister who guides unfailingly. For each
or any one of these that you admire, you give attributes that you do not
have and that you might one day acquire when the time is right. For that
kind and gentle stance you do not believe will serve you now, that
blindness and self-sacrifice is something to be gained at too high a
price, that devotion you might think is fine for one whose partner is
more loving than your own, that unconditional love is great, but must it
not be tempered by good judgment? And surely that ability to guide
others must be earned through the acquisition of wisdom not within your
reach.

<sup>4.13</sup> Thus, your image of love is based upon comparison. You
have chosen one who demonstrates that which in you is most lacking and
you use that image to chastise yourself while saying this is what you
want. 

<sup>4.14</sup> Your ideas of being in love are quite another category
altogether.  In this context love is not only full of sentiment but of
romance. This stage of love is seldom seen as lasting or as something
that can be maintained.  It is the purview of the young, and the
daydream of the aging. It is synonymous with passion and an overflow of
feelings that defy all common sense. To be in love is to be vulnerable,
for once common sense has failed to keep you acting as expected, you
might forget to guard your heart or to keep your real Self in hiding.
How dangerous indeed is such an act in a world where trust can turn to
treachery. 

<sup>4.15</sup> Each one of you has held an ideal of what the perfect
mate would mean, an ideal that changed over time. Those most bound by
the ego might think of stature and of wealth, of physical beauty and the
trappings of good upbringing.  Those most insecure will believe in a
partner who would shower him or her with praise and gifts, with
attention never wavering. Another who prizes independence seeks a
partner in good health, not too demanding, a companion and a lover who
will be convenient within a busy life. 

<sup>4.16</sup> You believe you can fall in love with the wrong person
and make a better choice based upon criteria more important than love.
You thus believe love is a choice, something to be given to some and not
to others. You hope to be a winner in this game you play, a chosen one
who will have each ounce of love that is given returned in kind. This is
a balancing act you play with God’s most holy gift, resenting giving
love that gains you little in return. And yet in this resentment you
recognize the truth of what love is. 

<sup>4.17</sup> In no other area of life do you expect such fairness,
such exchange of equal value. You give your mind to an idea, your body
to a job, your days to activities that do not interest or fulfill you.
You accept what you are paid within certain boundaries you have set; you
expect that a certain amount of prestige will follow certain
accomplishments; you accept that some tasks have to be done for
survival’s sake. You hope there will be some fairness here in what you
give and what you are given back. You hope your hard work will produce
results, the dinner you prepared be eaten with delight, your ideas
greeted as inspired. But this you do not expect. You often, in fact,
expect the reverse to be the case, and are grateful for each
acknowledgment the world gives you for the ways in which you spend your
days. For spend your days you do, and soon that spending will deplete
the limited number of days in store for you and you will die. Life is
not fair, nor meant to be, you claim. But love is something else. 

<sup>4.18</sup> In this you are correct, for love is nothing like your
image of your life and has no resemblance to how you spend your days or
the way your days will end. Love is all that is set apart in your
perception from what you do here. You think this setting apart gives
love little relevance to other areas of your life. Love is seen as
personal, something another gives in a special way to you alone, and you
to him or her. Your love life has nothing to do with your work life,
your issues of survival here, your ability to achieve success, or the
state of your health and general welfare. 

<sup>4.19</sup> Even you who do not recognize what love is protect what
you call love from the illusions you have made. 

<sup>4.20</sup> A thing set apart from the madness of the world is
useful now. It may not be what love is, but what love is has guided you
in choosing to set love apart from what you call the *real world*, from
that which is, in fact, the sum total of what you have made. The world
you struggle so to navigate is what you have made it, a place where love
fits not and enters not in truth. But love has entered you and leaves
you not, and so you too must have no place in this world that you have
made but must have another where you are at home and can abide within
love’s presence.  

<sup>4.21</sup> The lucky ones among you have made a place resembling
home within your world. It is where you keep love locked away behind
closed doors.  It is where you return after your forays into the world
that you have made and upon entering believe you leave the world’s
madness outside your door.  Here you feel safe and gather those you love
around you.  Here you share your day’s adventures, making sense of what
you can and leaving out the rest, and here you gain the strength you
need to walk outside those doors again another day. You spend your life
intent upon retiring to this safe place you have made of love in a world
of madness, and hope that you will live to see the day when you can
leave the madness behind, and that you will still find love behind the
doors you have passed through so many times in a journey spent earning
your right to leave it no more. 

<sup>4.22</sup> Some would call such a life selfish and wonder how the
occupants of this semi-happy dream have earned the right to turn their
backs upon the world even for the scanty hours that they make believe
they can do so.  Full-scale interaction with the world of madness is all
that some are willing to accept of others or themselves. These are the
angry ones who would demand that others bring what love they have into
the madness to take responsibility for the mess that has been made, to
attempt to restore order to chaos, anything so that the angry ones feel
less alone with what their anger shows them. Love, they say, cannot be
set apart, and so they feel love not, nor see it either. Yet they too
recognize love for what it is when they scream, “You cannot have it
while all of these do not. You cannot hoard it to yourself when so many
are in need.” 

<sup>4.23</sup> Everywhere you look is proof of love’s difference found.
This difference is your salvation. Love is not like anything or
everything else that goes on here. And so your places to worship love
have been built, your sacraments protect love’s holiness, your homes
host those you love most dearly. 

<sup>4.24</sup> Thus has your perception of love prepared you for what
love is. For within you is the altar for your worship, within you has
love’s holiness been protected, within you abides the Host who loves all
dearly. Within you is the light that will show you what love is and keep
it not set apart from life any longer.  Love cannot be brought to the
world of madness, nor the world of madness brought to love. But love can
allow a new world to be seen, a world that will allow you to abide
within love’s presence. 

<sup>4.25</sup> Take all the images of love set apart that you have made
and extend them outside love’s doors. What difference would a world of
love make to those who lock their doors upon the world? How vast the
reaches where their world of love could extend once love joined the
world. How little need for the angry ones to retain their anger when
love has joined the world. For love does join the world, and it is
within this joining that love abides, holy as itself. 

<sup>4.26</sup> The world is but a reflection of your inner life, the
reality unseen and unprepared for by all your strategy and defenses. You
prepare for everything that goes on outside yourself and nothing that
occurs within. Yet it is a joining that occurs within that brings about
the joining of all the world for all the world to see. This joining of
the world within is but your recognition of what love is, safe and
secure within you and your brother, as you join together in truth. Think
you not that this joining is a metaphor, a string of pleasant words that
will bring you comfort if you heed them, one more sentiment in a world
where lovely words replace what they would mean.  This joining is the
goal you seek, the only goal worthy of love’s call.

<sup>4.27</sup> This goal is set apart from all others as love is here,
a goal that touches not on what you perceive to be a loveless world. It
has no relation to the world outside of you, but every relation to the
world within, where, in love’s presence, both outer and inner worlds
become as one and led beyond your vision to the world that you have seen
and called your home. This foreign world where you have been so lonely
and afraid will linger for a while where it can terrify you no longer,
until finally it will fade away into the nothingness from which it came
as a new world rises up to take its place.

