---
chapter: "17"
title: "Chapter 17: Conscious Non-Planning"
---

<sup>17.1</sup> Being who you are is no luxury reserved for the idle
rich, or the very young or old. Being who you are is necessary for the
completion of the universe. Without the real you in it, there would be a
void within the universe—and this would be impossible. And yet there is
a way in which you are missing. 

<sup>17.2</sup> This has to do with consciousness and what you are aware
of. Let’s just say the space that you would fill as your own Self is
held for you by another part of your consciousness that has never left
it. It is the reunion of these two selves that will bring about the
completion of the universe and the return of heaven. *Where two are
joined together* can be used rightly here as well as in regard to
relationship. Your choice to separate from God is but a separation from
your own Self, and this is truly the separation that needs to be healed
to return you to God. 

<sup>17.3</sup> You shy away from thoughts of a consciousness beyond
that of which you are aware because of fear. And yet you know you cannot
claim that you are aware of all that exists within the universe, or even
that you fully know your own Self. What is fearful about the unknown is
simply that it is unknown. Coming to know what was previously unknown to
you can remove the fear, if you will let it.

<sup>17.4</sup> Consciousness of which you are unaware is not magic,
superstition, or insanity. Yet you shield yourself from knowledge of it
as if it would change the nature of the universe itself. It will change
your perception of it. This is both what you desire and what you fear
just as you both desire and fear knowing yourself. 

<sup>17.5</sup> There is an underlying assumption that you know all that
is good for you to know, and that to know more is going to mean that
things you would rather not know, and therefore must be *bad*, are what
will be revealed. And yet all the evidence of your own thoughts will
reveal to you your willingness to accept the *bad* about yourself and
your world.  And so this assumption that what is unknown must be bad
cannot be valid, even by your own standards of evidence.  Yet, in your
estimation, the unknown cannot be fully good or worthy of your knowing
because the reason that you use is loyal to the world you see. This is
why even heaven, which you would label good, is not wholly good in your
estimation of it. Why is it not wholly good? Because you have defined it
as lacking much of what you have judged to be good in the world you now
perceive. 

<sup>17.6</sup> You have, however, willingly entered many unknown
states. Some of you have gotten married, had children, taken
mind-altering drugs, or attempted strenuous or even terrifying physical
feats. But all of you without exception have willingly entered the
unknown state of sleep and experienced the loss of consciousness that it
brings. Each of you has had the experience of dreaming during the time
of sleep. Some may claim they know everything there is to know about
sleep and dreaming, being married, using drugs, or having children; but
even those of you who would listen to what the experts have to say
believe this not.  

<sup>17.7</sup> Each day is an unknown you enter into, despite your
every attempt to anticipate what it might hold. And yet, while it would
seem you would grow quite used to this phenomenon, you do not. You still
make your plans and rail against everything that interferes with them,
even knowing in advance that your greatest efforts at organization are
often to no avail. *A Course in Miracles* asks you to “receive instead
of plan,” and yet few of you understand the meaning of this simple
instruction or what it says to you of the unknown. 

<sup>17.8</sup> What it says is that the unknown is benevolent. What it
says is that what you cannot anticipate can be anticipated for you. What
it says is that you could be receiving constant help if you would but
let it come. What it says is that you are not alone. 

<sup>17.9</sup> Receiving implies that something is being given.
Receiving implies a willingness to accept what is given.  This
willingness is what you do not offer. Yet this is due to your lack of
understanding about the nature of creation, and can be corrected.

<sup>17.10</sup> Sin is simply the belief that correction cannot be
made. This is the mistake that has happened in creation. This is how the
impossible has become possible. If you were not so determined to believe
correction cannot be made, correction would have occurred. This is the
original error that is so in need of correction: your belief in sin—or
in other words, your belief that what you have chosen is not reversible. 

<sup>17.11</sup> Is this not evident in the judgment you rely upon and
in your treatment of criminals as well as of your own self and those you
love?  You believe mistakes must be paid for, not once but many times,
and no matter how heavy the payment is, it only “pays for” what was done
and cannot ever be undone. What does payment do but purchase something
that is then yours to keep? What have you purchased with all your effort
to make amends for your wrongdoing? You have but purchased guilt, and
hold it to yourself—a constant companion and a judgment on your own
self. 

<sup>17.12</sup> See you now why those who judge cannot enter heaven?
Judgment proceeds from the belief in sin and the irreversibility of all
errors.  If you do not believe you can reverse or “turn back” to the
state in which you existed before the original error, then you never
shall. 

<sup>17.13</sup> And yet all you need do is turn back. Being an observer
of your body has prepared you for this. Step back now to the place that
has been held for you. You have not lost “your place in line” because
you wandered. It has been held for you by the most loving of brothers, a
brother united with your own Self. 

<sup>17.14</sup> This space you can turn back to holds no judgment and
no fear, and so it is the repository of all that has proceeded from
love.  There it keeps all love’s gifts safe for you. Love’s gifts are
gifts of creation or extension, gifts you have both given and received.
Each act of love is added to the space in the universe that is yours and
has become part of the whole along with you. All that has proceeded from
fear is nothing, and has no existence apart from your own thoughts.

<sup>17.15</sup> Your thoughts, however, have become quite harsh, and
quite entrenched in the belief in their right to judge. Many of you have
let go of your belief in sin and still held onto your belief in
judgment, thinking one is different from the other. They are not
different, and while you do not see this your thoughts remain based on
fear and fear thus remains your foundation. For judgment is but the
belief that what God created can be changed, and has been. 

<sup>17.16</sup> Forgiveness, which replaces judgment, must come from
your heart.  To forgive based on the logic of your mind rather than the
compassion of your heart is to only give thought to forgiveness. This
many of you will give, even to deciding to forgive despite your better
judgment. See you not how little sense this makes, how insincere this
even sounds? 

<sup>17.17</sup> Sincerity is synonymous with wholeheartedness—a concept
you do not understand for it is beyond concepts. But now we begin to
integrate your learning as we move to wholeness. The first move toward
wholeness is but to understand this: heart and mind are not separate. A
united mind and heart is a whole heart, or wholeheartedness. You may ask
then why this Course has treated them as separate parts of you. This is
simply because this is the way you see them, and because it has allowed
me to address the different functions you have given them. 

<sup>17.18</sup> What is the same cannot have different functions. And
now your mind and heart must work together in the united function we
have established—returning to you your identity within God’s creation.

