---
chapter: "13"
title: "Chapter 13: Observation and Experience"
---

<sup>13.1</sup> You will never fully understand what unity means, but
you will come to *feel* what unity means, and this I promise you. This
is what we work toward in this Course, for once you have experienced the
*feeling* of unity, you will need no understanding of it. This is all
the exercises that call you to observe your body are for. They are the
preparation for what is to come: the preparation for feeling that which
is not of your body. Our next exercise takes this one step further, and
is merely an extension of the first. In this exercise you will begin to
realize that your brothers and sisters are not their bodies, any more
than you are yours. This is a natural extension of observing your body
in action, because as your body seems to interact with others and as you
observe this interaction, you will “see” yourself and others in a new
light.  Your body will seem more connected with those of the others it
interacts with, for they will be grouped together in your observation of
them. It will not be only others you observe but yourself and others,
placing you and “them” together where you belong. This seeming
togetherness of bodies is just a first step that will take you beyond
the illusion of bodies to togetherness of spirit. 

<sup>13.2</sup> As you observe, always with your heart and not your
mind, and begin to include others in your observation, I ask you to
concentrate on one thing only. This is a simple exercise, and enjoyable
too. It but calls for you to ask one thing: Ask yourself what you
already know of the spirit of the person you observe. You will be amazed
at the knowledge you already have and the joy it brings you to remember
it. 

<sup>13.3</sup> These are but exercises in memory recollection, and the
more you practice them the more true memory will return to you. Do not
apply any effort to these exercises, particularly not that of recalling
spirit.  Just let impressions come to you, and when they make you feel
like smiling know that you are feeling memory return. If, when trying to
call up memory of spirit, you find your brow knitting in concentration,
you are applying effort and need to cease attempting the exercise at
that time. If you give this exercise just the tiniest bit of consistent
practice, however, it will soon become routine to you, for you will want
to continuously experience the pleasure that it brings. 

<sup>13.4</sup> While you may desire to put what you feel into words,
this exercise is not about putting words on feelings or using them to
describe spirit.  It is best to leave words off this experience as, if
you do not, you will soon be ascribing some attributes to one spirit and
not to another, just to differentiate between them.  The purpose here is
to show you that they cannot be differentiated or compared or defined in
the same way you have defined their bodies in the past. 

<sup>13.5</sup> You will soon find that what you recall of spirit is
love. You will want to give it many names at first, and might not even
recognize it as love, for it will come without all the longing and
sadness you so often associate with it. While the feeling of love that
washes over you from one may feel like courage, and from another like
gentleness, and while this is all part of what you are encouraged to
feel, it is simply asked that you let the feelings come and with them
the realization that while no two spirits will seem exactly the same,
they also are not “different.” The love from each will fill you with
happiness because it is already complete and has no needs and so no
sense of longing or sadness of any kind. Because it is complete, it will
ask nothing of you, but will seem to offer you a warm welcome, as if you
are a long-lost friend returning home. 

<sup>13.6</sup> And so you are. This is the new “proof” that, while not
scientific or verifiable, will offer you the evidence you seek to
confirm the truth of what you are being told here. All that is required
to gather this new evidence is to trust in your own heart. Are you
willing to believe what your heart would tell you? 

<sup>13.7</sup> This exercise should take no time nor break your stride
or the flow of your conversation. All it asks you to do is to become
aware of spirit and to allow this awareness to abide within you. If you
feel resistance to attempting this exercise, remember that you already
know that you are more than your body, and ask yourself if it makes
sense to not do all you can to become aware of the “more” you know you
are. 

<sup>13.8</sup> While you will not realize it at first, because you have
no experience but only memory of feeling yourself in such a way, you
will eventually realize that the memories you recall of the spirit of
others include memories that are your own, memories that are of your own
Self.  For no spirit exists that is not part of you, or you of it. If
you find yourself distracted by these memories, do not push them aside
as interruptions in your day, but know that anything that distracts you
from the little self you think you are is worth the minutes you would
give to its contemplation. 

<sup>13.9</sup> What further objections can you have, for here we ask
you not to follow any instruction other than that of your own Self? We
invite the return of what you know, and let your real Self guide you
gently back to where you want to be and already are in truth. 

<sup>13.10</sup> Your ego will strongly resist your attempts to listen
to your heart, and will call this every kind of foolishness, a waste of
time that could be spent on better things. Yet time is not required, nor
is money or the use of any other thing you value. And there is not even
the slightest chance of being made to look foolish by what you are asked
to do. 

<sup>13.11</sup> Might some of your preconceived notions of others and
yourself be shattered? Oh yes, and rightly so. Gladly will you let them
go and, if you trust yourself, all the evidence against your brother
that you have stored up in your lifetime will be let go as well. 

<sup>13.12</sup> Each of you will initially find it difficult to accept
the innocence and sinlessness of others and yourself, for your memory
will contain no hint of past misdeeds, errors or mistakes. No one will
have leveled any hurts on you or anyone else.  No reason for guilt will
exist within this memory. No shame or fear is here, and no grievances of
any kind. For here forgiveness is already accomplished—and when memory
of forgiveness returns to you, can memory of your Father or your own
Self be far behind?

