---
chapter: "5"
title: "Chapter 5: Relationship"
---

<sup>5.1</sup> The Christ in you is wholly human and wholly divine. As
the wholly divine, nothing is unknown. As the wholly human, everything
has been forgotten. Thus we begin to relearn the known as the One who
already possesses all. It is this joining of the human and divine that
ushers in love’s presence, as all that caused you fear and pain falls
away and you recognize again what love is. It is this joining of the
human and divine that is your purpose here, the only purpose worthy of
your thought.

<sup>5.2</sup> You who have so filled your mind with senseless
wanderings and thoughts that think of nothing that is real, rejoice that
there is a way to end this chaos. The world you see is chaos and nothing
in it, including your thoughts, are trustworthy. This is why your
thoughts must be newly dedicated, dedicated to the only purpose worthy
of your thought: the purpose of joining with your real Self, the Christ
in you.

<sup>5.3</sup> I said earlier, it is only through union with me that you
learn, because it is only in union with me that you are your Self. Now
we must expand your understanding of union and of relationship as well
as your understanding of me. 

<sup>5.4</sup> Union is impossible without God. God is union.  Is this
not like saying God is Love? Love is impossible without union.  The same
is true of relationship. God creates all relationship. When you think of
relationship, you think of one relationship and then another.  The one
you share with this friend or that, with husband or wife, with child or
employer or parent. In thinking in these specific terms you lose the
meaning of the holy relationship. Relationship itself is holy.

<sup>5.5</sup> Relationship exists apart from particulars. This is what
you can’t conceive of and what your heart must newly learn. All truth is
generalizable because truth is not concerned with any of the specific
details or forms of your world. You think relationship exists between
one body and another, and while you think this is so, you will not
understand relationship or union or come to recognize love as what it
is. 

<sup>5.6</sup> Relationship is what exists between one thing and
another. It is not one thing or another thing. It is not a third thing
in terms of being a third object, but it is something separate, a third
something.  You realize that a relationship exists between your hand and
a pencil when you go to write something down, but it is a relationship
you take so completely for granted that you have forgotten that it
exists. All truth lies in relationship, even one so simple as this. The
pencil is not real, nor the hand that grasps it. Yet the relationship
between the two is quite real. “When two or more are joined together” is
not an injunction for bodies to unite. It is a statement that describes
the truly real, the only reality that exists. It is the joining that is
real and that causes all creation to sing a song of gladness. No one
thing exists without another. Cause and effect are one. Thus, one thing
cannot cause another without their being one or joined in truth.  

<sup>5.7</sup> We are beginning now to paint you a new picture, a
picture of things unseen before but visible to your heart if not your
eyes. Your heart knows love without a vision of it. You give it form and
say, “I love this one” or “I love that,” yet you know that love exists
apart from the object of your affection. Love is set apart in a frame
not of this world. You hold objects up to capture it, to put a frame
around love’s vision and say, “This is it.” Yet once you have it
captured and hanging for all to look at and behold, you realize this is
not love at all. You then begin your building of defenses, your evidence
to cite to say, “Yes indeed, this is love and I have it here. It hangs
upon my wall and I gaze upon it. It is mine to own and keep and cherish.
As long as it is where I can look upon it, it is real to me and I am
safe.” 

<sup>5.8</sup> “Ah,” you think when you find love, “now my heart is
singing; now I know what love is all about.” And you attach the love you
have found to the one in whom you found it and seek immediately to
preserve it. There are millions of museums to love, far more than there
are altars. Yet your museums cannot preserve love.  You have become
collectors rather than gatherers. Your fear has grown so mighty that all
that would combat it is collected for safekeeping. Like the frame of
love upon your wall, the collections that fill your shelves, whether
they are of ideas or money or things to look at, are your desperate
attempts to keep something for yourself away from all the rest. In
setting love apart, you recognized it had no place here; but you went on
to set yourself apart and all else that you could find to define as
valuable. You build your banks as well as your museums as palaces to
your love and no longer see the golden calves hiding within the palace
walls. 

<sup>5.9</sup> This urge to preserve things is but your urge to leave a
mark upon the world, a mark that says, “I have acquired much in my time
here.  These things I love are what I leave the world, what I pass down;
they declare that I was here.” Again you have the right idea, yet it is
so sadly displaced as to make a mockery of who you are. Love does mark
your place—but in eternity, not here. What you leave behind is never
real. 

<sup>5.10</sup> Love gathered together is a celebration. Love collected
is but a mockery of love. This difference must be recognized and
understood, as must the urge to set love apart from all the rest, for
with understanding, these urges can be made to make sense. With
understanding they can begin to bring sanity to an insane world. 

<sup>5.11</sup> You do not yet believe nor understand that the urges
that you feel are real, and neither good nor bad. Your feelings in truth
come from love, your response to them is what is guided by fear. Even
feelings of destruction and violence come from love. You are not bad,
and you have no feelings that can be labeled so. Yet you are misguided
concerning what your feelings mean and how they would bring love to you
and you to love.

<sup>5.12</sup> It is in understanding the relationship that exists
between what you feel and what you do that love’s lessons are learned.
Each feeling requires that you enter into a relationship with it, for it
is there you will find love. It is in every joining, every entering
into, that love exists. Every joining, every entering into, is preceded
by a suspension of judgment. Thus what is judged cannot be joined nor
entered into where it can be understood. What is judged remains outside
of you, and it is what remains outside that calls you to do what love
would call you not to do. What remains outside is all that has not
joined with you. What has joined with you becomes real in the joining,
and what is real is only love. 

<sup>5.13</sup> Do you see the practicality of this lesson? What terror
can be caused by an urge to violence that, once joined with love,
becomes something else? An urge to violence may mean many things, but
always lurking behind it is an overwhelming desire for peace. Peace may
mean destruction of the old, and love can facilitate the rise and fall
of many armies. What armies of destruction will rock the world when they
are brought to love? 

<sup>5.14</sup> Within you is all the world safe, sure, and secure. No
terror reigns. No nightmares rule the night. Let me give you once again
the difference between what is within and what is without: Within is all
that has joined with you. Without is all that you would keep separate.
Within you is every relationship you have ever had with anything.
Outside of you is all that you have kept apart, labeled, judged, and
collected on your shelves. 

<sup>5.15</sup> This is all the two worlds are made up of. The one you
see as real is the one you keep outside of yourself, making it possible
to look upon it with your body’s eyes. The one you do not see and do not
believe in is the one you cannot look outward to see, but is the one
that nonetheless is truly real. To look inward at the real world
requires another kind of vision: the vision of your heart, the vision of
love, the vision of the Christ in you. 

<sup>5.16</sup> You look outside the doors of your home and, whether you
see suburban streets bathed in lamplight, streets that teem with garbage
and crime, or cornfields growing, you say that is the real world. It is
the world you go out into in order to earn your living, receive your
education, find your mate. But the home in which you stand, much like
your inner world, is where you live the life that makes the most sense.
It is where your values are formed, your decisions are made, your safety
found. This comparison is not idly drawn. Your home is within and it is
real, as real as the home you have made within the world seems to be.
You can say the real world is somewhere outside yourself, as you picture
the real world being beyond your doors, but saying this cannot make it
so. 

<sup>5.17</sup> It is your continuing desire to have a relationship only
with the world without that causes such a world to remain. This is
because your definition of relationship is not one of joining. What you
join with becomes real. As you take it into your Self you thereby make
it real because you make it one with your real Self. This is reality.
All you do not join with remains outside and is illusion, for what is
not one with you does not exist. 

<sup>5.18</sup> You thus become a body moving through a world of
illusion where nothing is real and nothing is happening in truth. This
illusionary world is full of things you have told yourself and been
instructed that you have to do, but that you do not want to do. The more
your life consists of such things, the smaller your reality becomes. All
that would join with you and become part of the real world of your
creation remains beyond your reach.  

<sup>5.19</sup> There is nothing in your world that cannot be made holy
through relationship with you, for you are holiness itself. You do not
know this only because you fill your mind and leave your heart empty.
Your heart becomes full only through relationship or union. A full heart
can overshadow a full mind, leaving no room for senseless thoughts but
only for what is truly real. 

<sup>5.20</sup> The first and only exercise for your mind within this
Course has already been stated: Dedicate your thought to union. When
senseless thoughts fill your mind, when resentments arise, when worry
comes, repeat the thought that comes to open your heart and clear your
mind: “I dedicate all thought to union.” As often as you need to replace
senseless thoughts, think of this and say it to yourself not once but a
hundred times a day if needed. You do not need to worry about what to
replace your senseless thoughts with, as your heart will intercede by
fulfilling its longing for union as soon as you have expressed your
willingness to let it do so. 

<sup>5.21</sup> You do not yet understand the strength of your
resistance to the union that would turn hell into heaven, insanity to
peace. You do not yet understand your ability to choose that which you
make real in your creation of the world. The only meaning possible for
free will is this: What you choose to join with you, and what you choose
to leave outside of yourself. 

<sup>5.22</sup> Your desire to be separate is the most insane desire of
which you have conceived. Over all your longing for union you place this
desire to be separate and alone. Your entire resistance to God is based
on this.  You think you have chosen to be separate from God so that you
can make it on your own, and while you long to return to God and the
heaven that is your home, you do not want to admit that you cannot get
there on your own. You thus have made of life a test, believing that you
can pass or fail through your own effort. Yet the more you struggle to
do so on your own, the more you realize the futility of your efforts,
even though you do not want to admit that your efforts are futile. You
cling to effort as if it is the way to God, not wanting to believe all
effort is in vain or that a simple solution exists. A simple solution
within your world, a solution that requires no exertion on your part, is
seen to be of little value.  The individual, you reason, is made through
all this effort and struggle and without it would not be. In this you
are correct, for as you make of yourself an individual, you deny
yourself your union with all others.

<sup>5.23</sup> All your efforts to be an individual are concentrated on
the life of your body. Your concentration on the life of your body is
meant to keep your body separate. “Overcoming” is your catch phrase here
as you struggle to overcome all the adversity and obstacles that would
keep you from having what you think you want to have. This is your
definition of life, and while it remains it defines the life you see as
real. It presents you with a thousand choices to make, not once but many
times, until you believe that your power of choice is a fantasy and that
you are powerless indeed. You thus narrow what you want and go after it
with single-minded determination, believing the only choice within your
control is what to work hard to obtain. If you let all the world recede
and concentrate on this one choice, you reason that you are bound to
eventually succeed. This is the extent of your faith in your own ability
to maneuver this world that you have made; and if you finally do
succeed, your faith is seen as justified. The cost is not examined nor
acknowledged, yet when this faith is realized the cost becomes quite
real. Rather than feeling as if you have gained, feelings of loss will
now be what you fight to overcome. What have you done wrong, you wonder?
Why are you not satisfied with all you have achieved? 

<sup>5.24</sup> This *getting what you want* that drives your life is
proven time and time again to not be what you want once you have
achieved it. Yet you think when this occurs that you have simply chosen
the wrong thing and so choose another and another, not stopping to
realize that you choose among illusions.  You are so surprised that you
have not found happiness in what you seek!  You continue living life as
a test, driving yourself to follow one accomplishment with another, sure
that the next one or the next will be the one to do the trick. 

<sup>5.25</sup> A trick this is indeed, for what has once failed to work
will surely fail again. Stop now and give up what you think you want. 

<sup>5.26</sup> Stop now and realize your reaction to these words, the
strength of your resistance. Give up what you want? This is surely what
you have expected God to ask of you and what you have spent your
lifetime guarding against. Why should you make this sacrifice? What then
would your life be for? You want so little really. How can you be asked
to give this up? 

<sup>5.27</sup> You do want little, and only when you realize this can
you proceed to claiming everything that is yours. 

<sup>5.28</sup> For every joining, every union that you enter into, your
real world is increased and what is left to terrify you decreased. This
is the only loss that union generates, and it is a loss of what was
merely illusion.  As union begins to look more attractive to you, you
are beginning to wonder how it comes about. There must be some secret
you do not know.  What is the difference, you ask, between setting a
goal and achieving it and joining with something? 

<sup>5.29</sup> These do not have to be two separate things, but are
made so by your choice, the choice to achieve what you will on your own.
This is all the difference there is between union and separation.
Separation is all you perceive on your own. Union is all that you invite
me into and share with God. You cannot be alone nor without your Father,
yet your invitation is necessary for your awareness of this presence. As
I once was, you are both human and divine. What your human self has
forgotten, your real Self retains for you, waiting only for your welcome
to make it known to you once more. 

<sup>5.30</sup> God is known to you within relationships, as this is all
that is real here. God cannot be seen in illusion nor known to those who
fear Him. All fear is fear of relationships and thus fear of God. You
can accept terror that reigns in another part of the world because you
feel no relationship to it. It is only in relationship that anything
becomes real. This you realize and so you strive to keep far from you
all that in relationship with you would add to your discomfort and your
pain. To think that any relationship can cause terror, discomfort, or
pain is where you err in thinking of relationship. 

<sup>5.31</sup> You think that to come in contact with violence is to
have a relationship with it. This is not so. If this were so, you would
be joined to all you come in contact with and the world would be heaven
indeed, as all you see became blessed by your holiness. That you move
through your world without relating to it in any way is what causes your
alienation from the heaven it can be.  

<sup>5.32</sup> Remember now one lovely day, for each of you has had at
least one that was a shining light in a world of darkness. A day in
which the sun shone on your world and you felt part of everything. Every
tree and every flower welcomed you. Every drop of water seemed to
refresh your soul, every breeze to carry you to heaven. Every smile
seemed meant for you, and your feet hardly seemed to touch the soft
ground on which you walked. This is what awaits you as you join with
what you see. This awaits you as you place no judgment on the world, and
in so doing join with everything and extend your holiness across a world
of grief, causing it to become a world of joy.

