---
chapter: "21"
title: "Chapter 21: Love Is"
---

<sup>21.1</sup> Love is. 

<sup>21.2</sup> Love is eternal, and you do not as yet grasp its meaning
or the meaning of eternity. This is because, as a particular being, you
are time-bound. You can realize the eternal even in your temporary form
if you can let go of your particularity. Particularity has to do with
mass, substance, form. Your being is far beyond your imagined reliance
on the particular. The particular is about parts and parts are all you
see. I remind you of what was said earlier concerning relationships
existing apart from particulars. I repeat that relationship exists
*between* one thing and another and that it is in the intersection of
parts that the holiness of what is in-between is found.  This will be
discussed in more detail later, but for now, I return you, through the
embrace, to the holy relationship but in a broadened form.

<sup>21.3</sup> The holy relationship in its broadened form is eternity,
the eternity of the embrace. If the embrace is the source of all, the
one heartbeat, then it is eternity itself. It is the face of love, its
texture, taste, and feel. It is love conceptualized. It is an abstract
rather than a particular concept, even while having a seeming structure
that your heart can feel. Concepts that cannot be felt with your heart
are of no use to you now, for they are meant for their usefulness rather
than for their service. Concepts that touch your heart serve you through
this touch. They also begin to help break you away from the need for
comparisons, for there is no need to compare what your heart can feel.
When your heart can feel, you need no judgment to tell you the
difference between one thing and another. You thus can begin to quit
relying on your body’s eyes to distinguish the true from the false, the
real from the unreal. 

<sup>21.4</sup> Love appeals to you through the heart. God appeals to
you through your heart. Your heart has not been open to the appeals of
love partially because of your use of concepts. Concepts have been used
to order your world and to assist your mind in keeping track of all that
is in it. Your mind does not need this assistance. To begin to
conceptualize in ways that touch your heart will free your mind of its
reliance on thought concepts, thus allowing heart and mind to *speak the
same language or to be communicated with in the same way.*

<sup>21.5</sup> There has been a division between the language of your
mind and heart. Your mind insists on thinking and learning in a certain
way, a way contrary to the language of your heart, and so, like two
people from different countries speaking different languages, there has
been little communication and much misunderstanding. Occasionally the
problems associated with a lack of a common language have been set aside
when the actions needed in a certain circumstance have demanded
cooperation. You see this in times of emergency or crisis of every kind.
And like the two people from different countries who do not understand
each other, working together momentarily diminishes the boundaries of
language, and a temporary solidarity is formed through like action. At
such times two strangers who are foreign to one another might recognize
that the other’s “heart is in the right place.” The “right place” with
two people—as with mind and heart—is the place of no division. The
unification of mind and heart that produces right action currently
occurs primarily in crisis situations because of a lack of shared
language. The formation of a shared language can thus be seen to aid in
unification. 

<sup>21.6</sup> *The embrace* can now be likened to the starting point
of a shared language, a language shared by mind and heart and by all
people. It is a language of images and concepts that touch the one heart
and serve the one mind. 

<sup>21.7</sup> Conflict between mind and heart occurs for an additional
reason as well, although this conflict has at its root the problem of
language as determined by perception. This is a problem of meaning. Mind
and heart interpret meaning in different ways. You do not even begin to
understand the enormity of this conflict or what it means to you, but I
assure you that as long as mind and heart interpret meaning in different
ways you will not find peace. You have, in the past, accepted these
different interpretations as natural. You see that there are two ways of
viewing a situation, even if you do not label one way of viewing or
perceiving being of the mind and the other of the heart. And you accept
this conflict-inducing situation. You accept that your mind sees one
truth and your heart another, and you act anyway! You act without
agreement or resolution. You act without unity. And, just as if you were
two people acting on different truths in the same situation, conflict
cannot help but continue. No matter which path you follow, the path of
the mind or the path of the heart, you will not get where you are
wanting to go until they are joined. You might imagine three paths—one
path representing mind, one path representing heart, and one path
representing wholeheartedness. The path of neither mind nor heart alone
will take you where the path of unity will take you, and the journey
will not be the same. 

<sup>21.8</sup> The major cause of the conflict that arises between mind
and heart is the perception of internal and external differences in
meaning. In extreme instances this is considered moral conflict, an
example being the individual knowing the “right” thing to do but acting
instead on what is the accepted thing to do within his or her community.
In such an instance the external and internal meanings of the same
situation are considered to be different. This is fairly easy to see in
extreme circumstances, but it is a situation that exists constantly and
in every instance until unity is achieved. Until unity is achieved you
do not understand that you give meaning to all things, and that there is
nothing and no one external to you who can determine meaning for you. 

<sup>21.9</sup> The final thing you must understand is that meaning does
not change. While only you can determine meaning, and while only a
wholehearted approach will determine true meaning, the truth is the
truth and does not change. Only unity, however, allows you to see the
truth and to claim it as your discovery and your truth as well as
universal truth. Seeing the truth returns you to unity and to true
communication or communion with your brothers and sisters in Christ.
*Your brothers and sisters in Christ* is an expression that has always
been meant to symbolize the unity of those who know the one truth.

<sup>21.10</sup> Knowing the one truth is not about knowing a certain
dogma or a set of facts. Those who know the truth do not see themselves
as right and others as wrong. Those who know the truth find it for
themselves by joining mind and heart. Those who know the truth become
beings of love and light and see the same loving truth in all.

