---
chapter: "27"
title: "Chapter 27: Being"
---

<sup>27.1</sup> We return now to what your being is. Being is. As love
is. You have attached being to being *human*. In your quest to identify
yourself, you simply narrowed yourself to the visible and describable.
Thus you have identified death as the only means by which to reach
oneness with your Father, knowing that such oneness is not compatible
with the human nature you ascribe to yourself. In this one error do all
errors lie. For what quest can be fulfilled when the only answer to life
seems to be death? This is why and how my death and resurrection
provided an answer and an end to the need for answers. 

<sup>27.2</sup> Your *being* here is not futile or without purpose. Your
*being* is itself all purpose, all honor, all glory.  There is no being
apart from being. There is no being *alive* and being *dead*, being
*human* or being *divine*. There is only being. Being is.

<sup>27.3</sup> Yet being, like love, is in relationship. Thus, your
purpose here, rather than being one of finding meaning, is one of coming
to know through relationship. It is in coming to know through
relationship that you come to know your Self. 

<sup>27.4</sup> The purpose of this Course has been stated in many ways
and is stated again here: The purpose of this Course is to establish
your identity. The importance of this purpose cannot be overestimated.
Let us address the question of why this is so important.

<sup>27.5</sup> You have been caught in a cycle of seeing the self as
important for a period of time and then seeing the self as unimportant
for a period of time. Seeing the self as important seems at one time
like a function of the ego, and at another as a function of the divine.
You become confused between the personal self and a true Self only
because you have not as yet identified your true Self. Once you have
identified your true Self all such confusion will end. 

<sup>27.6</sup> We have already stated that relationship is the only
“known” in an unknowable world. We have already stated that the only
being who is not beyond the limits of total knowing is the Self. Thus it
is in knowing the Self that all is known. 

<sup>27.7</sup> When you fully realize that the only way to know the
Self is through relationship, your concerns about concentration on the
self will end.  Life is not a matter of self versus other. Life is a
matter of relationship. Life is not a matter of human versus divine, but
a matter of relationship between the human and the divine. Life is not a
matter of one living thing versus another, but of the relationship
between all living things. 

<sup>27.8</sup> If you can only come to know your Self through
relationship, you can only come to know God through relationship. Christ
is the holy relationship that exists between all and God, providing the
bridge that spans the very concept of *between* and provides for the
connection of unity. Thus your relationship with Christ always was and
always will be.  Your task here is to come to know that relationship
once again. 

<sup>27.9</sup> The thought of God by which you were created is
synonymous with the Christ in you. It is your relationship with your
Source and all that He created. 

<sup>27.10</sup> Can you begin to visualize or perceive your true
identity as relationship itself? And what of God? Can you unlearn all
concepts and free your mind to accept all relationship instead? If all
meaning and all truth lies in relationship, can you be other than
relationship itself? Can God? Can you imagine relationship rather than
singular objects and bodies, as *all* that exists, and thus who you are
and who God is? Is it such a huge leap to go from saying you only exist
in relationship to you only exist as relationship? You think it is, and
feel yourself further diminished and lacking in identity just by
contemplating such an idea. And so you must be reassured of the Self you
are. 

<sup>27.11</sup> This establishment of your identity that we seek to do
here is not just so that you can better understand yourself or your
world, or even so that you can bring Heaven to Earth. Although these are
complementary goals, as stated before, these are goals that you cannot
accomplish “on your own” or with the concept you now hold of yourself.
Just as you can look about and see that no two bodies on this earth are
exactly the same, the Self you are is a unique Self. A Self of
relationship does not imply a Self that is the same as all the rest. But
it does imply a Self that is integral to all the rest. You matter, and
you matter as an interactive part of the relationship that is life. You
are already accomplished as who you are. All is accomplished in unity.
In separation you merely strive for all that is yours in relationship.
Relationship is unity, and relationship is your natural state. It is who
you are. 

<sup>27.12</sup> Because you do not understand does not mean that you
are not learning the truth. You do not understand because you think in
terms of singularity rather than in terms of unity. This is why this
Course has not concentrated on your thinking. Again you are bidden to
turn to your heart for the truth that is hidden there yet waiting to be
revealed.  Your heart knows of unity and knows not any desire to be
alone and separate. Your heart understands relationship as its source of
being.  You are not separate from your Source. 

<sup>27.13</sup> Living in relationship is living in love and is living
as who you are. Living in relationship is living in the present. How do
you learn to move from living in separation to living in relationship? 

<sup>27.14</sup> To live in relationship is to accept all that is
happening in the present as your present reality, and as a call to be in
relationship with it. It is the willingness to set aside judgment so
that you are not contemplating what “should” be happening rather than
what is happening.  It looks past perception of “others” to relationship
and wholeness. To live in relationship is to live in harmony even with
conflict. It is an understanding that if conflict arises in your present
there is something to be learned from your relationship with conflict. 

<sup>27.15</sup> Living in relationship is living from your center, the
heart of your Self. It is complete reliance on relationship itself
rather than on the mind. Thus your actions reflect the proper response
to the relationship that is occurring in the present rather than to your
preconceived notions of others, the previous judgments your mind once
made and relies upon out of habit, or your considerations of what the
situation might mean to your future. It is not the individual “you” that
dictates your responses to situations based on surface interpretations
of what those situations entail. It is rather the you in and within the
relationship that responds out of the knowledge gained through
relationship. 

<sup>27.16</sup> How often have you, even with the best of intentions,
not known the proper response to make? You even wonder as you pray
whether you should pray for specific outcomes or for God’s Will to be
done. You fear being a miracle worker because you do not think that you
will ever know what is called for. 

<sup>27.17</sup> As you learn to live in relationship in the present,
this confusion will pass. Your relationship will guide you surely to the
proper response. I use the term “proper” here not as a measure of
judgment, but as an indication that there is a *way* in which those who
live in relationship become certain, and their willingness to act
unimpeded by uncertainty. All uncertainty is fear. All fear is doubt
about one’s self. How can you not know how to respond when doubt is gone
and certainty has come? How can certainty ever come without an
understanding of the relationship of all things? 

<sup>27.18</sup> Does an understanding of the relationship of all things
mean that you will have power that is not of this world? Will you see
the future and the past, be cognizant of destiny and of fate? You do
have power that is not of this world, but this does not mean power as
you see it here, the power of details and the information of which you
think when desiring or fearing a fate of prophecy. The power we speak of
is the power of *knowing*. 

<sup>27.19</sup> How often have you known the “right” thing to do
without knowing the details of what came before and what was to come?
Sometimes you have acted on this knowing, and at other times not. Living
in relationship provides a constant knowing of this sort, a simple
knowing of a *way* things are meant to be. It is a knowing felt within
the heart for which there still will be no proof, but for which there
will be the certainty you heretofore have lacked. The typical fears you
have experienced in the past will not arise within this knowing. 

<sup>27.20</sup> How will you know when you have achieved the state of
grace in which you were created, and that you are living in
relationship? You will know by the certainty you feel. If you do not
feel this certainty, what can you do? 

<sup>27.21</sup> You are ready now, and all that will prevent you from
living a life of love is unwillingness to do so. There is only one
remaining source of such unwillingness. Your willingness will now depend
on whether or not you trust. Do you trust these words? Do you trust in
God?  Can you trust in your Self?

