---
chapter: "30"
title: "Chapter 30: Being Present"
---

<sup>30.1</sup> How is being present different than being? Are they not
the same thing? Should they not be? And yet how seldom are you fully
present for your own life, your own Self, your own being. If you were
fully aware of your own being, you would be in oneness with Your Father. 

<sup>30.2</sup> How can one be distracted from oneself? And yet you are.
Many go through life searching for self-definition, self-actualization.
Where are they as they search? Where is their being? If reaching a
particular destination is all that is sought, the journey becomes but
the means for getting there. All learning is seen as preparation for the
future, or for some eventual outcome, rather than for your being. You
attempt to learn for something other than your Self, for some purpose
other than your Self.  Thus was service given another route for being
separated from the Self and your function here. When you learn in order
to contribute something to your work and your world, you bypass your
Self. 

<sup>30.3</sup> Your learning must take on a new focus. *Be like the
little children*, and inhale the world around you in order to make it
part of your Self. *Be like the little children*, and learn in order to
claim your learning for your Self. Learn who you are through each
experience rather than learning in order to find out who you are or what
your contribution will eventually be. 

<sup>30.4</sup> Being in relationship is being present. Being present
has nothing to do with time as you think of it. You think of this
instruction to be present as an instruction that relates to time. You
think of present time, past time, future time. We have spoken of these
modes of *keeping* time as well, but as the word *keeping* illustrates,
there is nothing about time that can be kept. The only thing real about
time is its eternal nature. 

<sup>30.5</sup> You are headed toward what might be called universal
consciousness, though you will not know it when it is at first achieved.
For universal consciousness is knowing Self, while you think it is
knowing all.  Knowing Self is knowing all, but this you do not as yet
understand. 

<sup>30.6</sup> Universal consciousness is being in relationship. It is
the true Self, the known Self, in all its glorious relationship with
life. All matter is born and dies. All life is forever. The known Self
realizes this and begins to act in accordance with this knowing. 

<sup>30.7</sup> This world as you perceive of it is built around the
foundation of fear, a fear that stemmed from the belief in finite life,
in being born into a body and dying to the body. The person who *knows*,
truly *knows*, the simplest truth of the identity of the Self no longer
lives in a dualistic position with God, but in a monistic state with
Him. The difference is in realizing relationship with the infinite
instead of the finite, with life as opposed to matter. 

<sup>30.8</sup> This huge difference is easily overlooked and rarely
seen as the key that unlocks the door to universal consciousness, being
present.  There is no *being* and no *present* in matter. In matter,
being must be attached to form. In the sense of time described by the
word present, there is no infinitude, but only a vague concept of *now*.
This is the key concept that I not only knew but demonstrated. This is
the legacy, the inheritance, I left to you. 

<sup>30.9</sup> This discourse may seem to have traveled far from words
of love, words promised and words given in truth. For no love is finite
in nature. Love has no beginning and no end. Love is a demonstration and
a description of universal consciousness, of being in relationship.

<sup>30.10</sup> All relationship is relationship with God Who Is Love. 

<sup>30.11</sup> What the Course is speaking of now, in essence, is gain
without loss. You will never be aware of gain without loss while you
believe in what is finite in nature. The cycle of giving and receiving
is thus never complete, and the certainty you seek always waiting for
something you do not yet have—some information, some guarantee, some
proof or validation.  You might think if you are “right” you will be
successful, if you are “successful” you will be secure, if you are
“good” you will prosper. You do not see these ways of thinking as ideas
associated with gain and loss, but they are. All thinking that is of a
“if this, then that” nature is thinking in terms of gain and loss. This
is why we have worked to leave thinking behind. This belief in gain and
loss is a cornerstone of your system of perception viewed from a stance
of “if this, then that.” It rules the nature of your existence because
you have made it ruler by abandoning the laws of God. 

<sup>30.12</sup> The laws of God are laws of Love. Within the laws of
love there is no loss, but only gain. 

<sup>30.13</sup> The source of love and its location is your own heart.
Think now of the created form, the body. When the heart stops beating,
life is seen to be over. Are you thus your heart? Or can you not see
that the created form was made in God’s own image, as was all creation.
You are God’s image given form, as is all creation. We, all of us
together, are the heartbeat of the world. Without unity we would not be.
Without our Source, which is God, we would not be. 

<sup>30.14</sup> The laws of unity are God’s laws and are simple indeed:
giving and receiving are one. And thus giving and receiving as one is
the only way in which God’s laws are fulfilled. Since God’s laws are the
laws that rule the universe, they cannot go unfulfilled. Giving and
receiving are thus one in truth. God’s laws are generalizable and do not
change, and thus the laws of man have not usurped the laws of God. It is
only in your perception that the laws of man take precedence over the
laws of God. Since perception arises from the mind, we must now discuss
the mind.

