---
chapter: "-1"
title: "Introduction"
---

<sup>I.1</sup> This course was written for the mind—but only to move the
mind to appeal to the heart. To move it to listen. To move it to accept
confusion. To move it to cease its resistance to mystery, its quest for
answers, and to shift its focus to the truth and away from what can be
learned only by the mind.

<sup>I.2</sup> What is learned by the mind only rearranges reality. The
mind then holds to the new reality as a new set of rules without change.
It sees reality through these new mental constructs and calls this way
of seeing new. In order to support its new reality it must insist that
others follow these new rules. Truth, it says, has been found, and it is
“here” in these new rules and not in those of old. The mind will then
tell you how to feel according to its rules and will resist all ways of
feeling, all ways of being, that appear to run counter to these rules,
as if it knows, because of these rules, how things are.

<sup>I.3</sup> The mind will speak of love and yet hold the heart
prisoner to its new rules, new laws, and still say “this is right” and
“this is wrong.” <sup>I</sup>t will speak of love and not see its
intolerance or judgment. It will speak of love to be helpful and with
all sincerity, and yet the very logic that it uses, though new, wounds
the heart of the most tender, of those most called to love and its
sweetness. “I am wrong to feel the way <sup>I</sup> do” the
tender-hearted says to herself and, convinced that another knows what
she does not, covers over her tenderness with protection.

<sup>I.4</sup> You think that in order to share you must be able to
speak the same language and so you regress to the language of the mind
with its precision. The mind so hates to be confused, to be open, to
remain open, and to not know. It desires anchors to hold it in one spot,
and held there suffers the pounding of the sea of change, resists the
current, fortifies itself against the storm. The mind will return always
to where it feels safe and sure of itself and so it goes nowhere and
sees not transformation, or creation, or the new horizon that would defy
its reality.

<sup>I.5</sup> The mind cannot hold open the doors of the heart and yet
we turn within, turn to the mind, and show it where its openness lies,
where sweetness abides, where love’s knowing is found. All the mind can
do is rearrange reality and hold it still and captive and rule bound.
The laws of love are not laws such as these. The laws of love are not
rules, facts, or right answers.  The laws of love bring spiritual
freedom, the freedom that lies beyond belief, beyond thought, beyond
adherence to any authority other than one’s own heart.

<sup>I.6</sup> The heart is needed to guide the mind in a way that it
does not desire to be guided, a way that is one of joining, a way that
does not allow the mind’s separate stance, its rules, or its right
answers. The heart is needed because it is who and where you are and
responds in love to what is one with it. We are One Heart.

<sup>I.7</sup> We are one mind. The route to oneness and union, to life
in form that accepts oneness and union, to a humanity restored to
wholeness, is through the heart of the mind.

<sup>I.8</sup> This Course will seem remedial to some, easy to some,
complex to some. The mind may say, “Yes, yes, I know. Tell me something
I don’t know.” The mind may reel at contradictions, cling to known
truths, compare this wisdom to other wisdom. The mind will attempt to
understand with its own logic and fight the logic of the heart. The mind
will seek new rules and perhaps be willing to rearrange its reality once
again.

<sup>I.9</sup> The mind is its own reality. You cannot escape the mind’s
reality with the mind. You cannot learn how to escape the reality of the
mind with the mind’s pattern of learning or of logic. You cannot live in
a new and fresh world and retain the mind’s reality.

<sup>I.10</sup> There is no “everyone” to whom I speak, to whom I give
these words.  There is no single, no solitary, no separate mind to whom
these words are spoken. These words are spoken heart to heart, from One
Heart to One Heart.

<sup>I.11</sup> “Everyone” is just a concept. These words are given to
each One.  They are heard only by each “alone,” by which I mean in the
sanctity of the One Heart. We are One Heart. We are one mind. Joined in
wholeheartedness we are the heaven of the world. We replace bitterness
with sweetness. We dwell in the reality of the One Heart, creation’s
birthplace, birthplace of the new.

<sup>I.12</sup> The new is not that which has always existed. It is not
that which can be predicted. It is not that which can be formed and held
inviolate.  The new is creation’s unfolding love. The new is love’s
expression. The new is the true replacement of the false, illusion’s
demise, joy birthed amongst sorrow. The new is yet to be created, One
Heart to One Heart.

<sup>I.13</sup> This is a course for the heart. The birthplace of the
new.

