---
title: "Learning in the Time of Christ&mdash;Part One"
---

*In 2003, about a year after the scribing of A Course of Love was
completed, Mari received “Learning in the Time of Christ.” It is an aid
to the reader and anticipates the formation of discussion groups. Its
three parts correspond to the three Books—The Course (I), The Treatises
(II), and The Dialogues (III). Each part has been placed at the end of
its respective Book.*

<sup>A.1</sup> A major difference between *A Course in Miracles* and *A
Course of Love* has to do with the movement into the Time of Christ, a
time of direct learning in union and relationship with God.  The word
*learning* is loosely used here for no learning is needed in union and
relationship. 

<sup>A.2</sup> Yet, as your work with *A Course of Love* begins,
learning and unlearning continue. It continues for the sole purpose for
which learning has always existed—that of returning you from self-doubt
to self-love. This could also be expressed as returning you from your
perceived state of separation to your true state of union.  Learning is
needed only until perception is cured. The perception of your separated
state was the illusion for which a cure was needed—and within *A Course
in Miracles* offered. 

<sup>A.3</sup> Perception is the result of learning. Perception is
learning. 

<sup>A.4</sup> Since the mind is the realm of perception we have taken a
step away from the realm of perception by appealing to the heart and the
heart’s ability to learn in a new way.  You are thus instructed not to
apply your thought and your effort, your usual means of learning, to
this Course of Love. This Course is not for the mind but for the heart.
It is not a way of thought and effort but a way of feeling, of ease, and
of direct relationship. Again I say to you, in the direct relationship
achieved in union, no learning is required.  Until you have truly
recognized unity, which may come before or after completing the
“Treatise on the Nature of Unity and Its Recognition,” you continue to
perceive of yourself as a learning being. This is the only reason for
this continuation of the coursework provided in A Course in Miracles.
While you continue to put effort into learning what cannot be learned,
as you continue to see yourself as a student seeking to acquire what you
do not yet have, you cannot recognize the unity in which you exist and
be freed from learning forever. 

<sup>A.5</sup> This is not to say that you will find this Course or the
end of learning to be easy.  Yet it is your difficulty in giving up your
attachment to learning through the application of thought and effort
that creates the perception of this Course’s difficulty. Thus it is said
to you to take this Course with as little attachment to your old means
of learning as is possible for you. If you do not understand, accept
that you do not understand and go on. Listen to the words as if they are
spoken to you, for such they are. Listen as you would listen to a friend
in conversation. Listen simply to hear what is being said. Listen simply
to let the words enter you. 

<sup>A.6</sup> This is recommended for your first reading of the Course. 

<sup>A.7</sup> When you succeed at listening without seeking for
understanding, without grasping for meaning, without applying the effort
you are used to applying to study, you begin the transformation that is
the movement from head to heart and from their separation to their
union. 

<sup>A.8</sup> In wholeheartedness, then, you are ready to return to a
second reading of the Course. In wholeheartedness you will find
difficulty falling away and understanding arising. You are beginning to
know yourself in a new way. You are beginning to know yourself without
the perceptions and the judgments of the mind. You are beginning to know
yourself as you truly are and you will begin to hear the language of the
Course as the language of your own heart. 

<sup>A.9</sup> Now you may feel quite compelled to share your experience
of the Course with others. What might you expect to find? 

<sup>A.10</sup> Often you will find a desire to read the Course again—to
read it aloud—to hear it spoken. This is a natural desire to let the
words of the Course enter you in yet another way—the way of voice. Again
it is not required nor even recommended that these readings be
interrupted by a search for meaning. Listen. Respond. Let meaning be
revealed. 

<sup>A.11</sup> What you will find yourself accepting through this
method is precisely what cannot be taught. What you are learning through
this method is precisely what cannot be sought after and attained
through your seeking. What you are finding through this method is
receptivity.  You are coming home to the way of the heart. What you gain
by sharing with others is a situation in which you “learn” in unity
through the receptivity of the heart. 

<sup>A.12</sup> Am I telling you not to question? Not to enter
discussion? I am only telling you to receive before you seek to
perceive. I ask you not to receive as one who does not have what another
has, as this is not a passing on of information that you do not possess.
I ask you merely to receive in order to learn receptivity, the way of
the heart. I ask you only to pause, to give the mind a rest, to enter a
realm foreign to the mind and yet beloved to the heart. I ask you but to
give yourself a chance to let the relief of not having another task to
apply your effort to fill you. I ask you but to give yourself a chance
to forget about approaching this as one more self-improvement exercise,
or one more objective to accomplish. Only in this way do you come to
realize you are already accomplished. 

<sup>A.13</sup> Through receptivity, what your mind finds difficult to
accept, your heart accepts with ease. Now you are ready to question what
you must.  Now you are ready to hear the answer that arises in your own
heart or from the voice of the man or woman sitting next to you. Now you
are ready to hear all the voices around you without judgment, to enter
discussion without an agenda to attend to, to not be so anxious to say
what you are thinking that you forget to listen. Now you are ready to
let understanding come without the aggressiveness of going out to get
it. 

<sup>A.14</sup> You are patient, loving, and kind. You have entered the
time of tenderness. You begin to hear what your feelings are saying to
you without the interferences and cautions of your thinking mind. You
begin to trust and as you begin to trust you begin to extend who you
are. True giving and receiving as one begins to take place. You have
entered Holy Relationship. 

<sup>A.15</sup> The task of facilitators of such meetings of open hearts
is to direct the reader away from ego-mind and back to wholeheartedness
or Christ-mind. “How do you feel?” is a more appropriate question than,
“What do you think?” The sharing of experience is more appropriate than
the sharing of interpretation. The sharing of process is more
appropriate than the sharing of outcome. Facilitators will keep readers
from attempting one correct interpretation, as the only correct
interpretation is that which comes from each reader’s own internal
guidance system. Group attendees will find themselves feeling less
competitive or interested in asserting their beliefs as it becomes clear
to them that unlike in other learning situations, there is no correct
answer or specific set of beliefs to be adopted. The student begins to
move beyond the need for shared belief to personal conviction and
authority. 

<sup>A.16</sup> Can students be misguided? Is there, in other words,
perhaps no “right” answer or correct interpretation, but “wrong” answers
and inaccurate interpretations? This is a matter of unity versus
separation rather than a matter of right and wrong. In unity and
relationship, each is not only capable but will inevitably receive the
answer and come to the understanding or interpretation that is “right”
for them. 

<sup>A.17</sup> Those who do not enter unity and relationship cannot be
helped, fixed, or shown the inaccuracies of their perceptions. Their
perceptions will remain true for them because their minds have told them
they are true and their belief in the supremacy of the mind has
temporarily overridden the openness of their hearts. The need for some
to remain within the teaching and learning situation of “right” and
“wrong” answers will be strong. Many will not be dissuaded from the
logic that tells them they must work hard to attain anything of value. 

<sup>A.18</sup> Let me be clear. The seeming lack of difficulty in this
Course is where its difficulty lies.  To give up difficulty for ease is
more than some egos are willing to accept. To give up effort for
receptivity is more than some can accept.  Why? Because it is too
difficult. It goes against all you have learned and the nature of the
reality in which the mind has functioned. In turning to the heart we
seek to bypass this difficulty as much as possible, but each will feel
it to some degree, the precise degree to which they are capable of
giving up reliance on what they but think has worked for them in the
past. 

<sup>A.19</sup> The way of the heart is the way of the Time of Christ.
The time of the Holy Spirit has passed. The time of the intermediary is
over. The greatest intermediary of all has been the mind. It has stood
between you and your own inner knowing, caught in a dream of perception. 

<sup>A.20</sup> Collectively and individually, you have come to a level
of frustration with what can be taught that has exceeded its limits.
Your readiness is felt as impatience. Many can ride the wave of this
impatience to a new way. Others need to battle against it a while
longer. 

<sup>A.21</sup> For those ready for a new way the time of battles has
ended.  They care to engage in no more debates, care not to be proven
right or proven wrong, care not to hear the evidence for this approach
or that.  They have grown weary of the ways of the mind. They are ready
to come home to the way of the heart. 

<sup>A.22</sup> The way of learning in the Time of Christ brings with it
a new kind of evidence, an evidence demonstrated clearly and plainly
with every willingness to end reliance on the ego-mind and to leave the
hell of the separate self behind. What will be demonstrated and shared
is the perfect logic of the heart, and that abandonment of the old way
will not bring forth ruin but will bring instead the wisdom that each
one knows she or he has always possessed.

<sup>A.23</sup> Facilitators can rely on this demonstration even when
many in a group may remain attached to the ways of the thinking mind.
The demonstration will work for those who observe from a place of unity
even if it works not at all for the reader who cannot find it within
him- or her-self to accept union. There is no cause to delay the
movement of the group or to feel anything but gentleness toward those
who cannot at this time accept the new way. No harm will come to anyone
from the demonstration that will be provided of just how little gain
comes to those who cannot receive. 

<sup>A.24</sup> Through receptivity is the wisdom inherent in being who
you truly are revealed. Being who you truly are, accepting your true
identity, is the goal of this Course and of this beginning level of what
I only loosely call a curriculum. It is appropriate to remember and to
be reminded at this level, that being true to your Self is not about
reaching an ideal state or a state of identity exactly the same as
another’s. It is also not about being selfless. These ideas too are part
of the unlearning of this Course and are to be discouraged.

<sup>A.25</sup> Readers then naturally may wonder what there is left to
strive for and in doing so reach again the very difficult transition
away from striving. In unity, perfection is the reality. Your reality is
union.  Thus no striving for either unity or perfection is necessary.
The “answer” for those in need of challenges, is the challenge presented
in the call to reside in unity and to express the divinity of their
nature through sharing in union and relationship. This call is addressed
further in the work of the Treatises.

