---
chapter: "0"
title: "The Prelude"
---

<sup>P.1</sup> This is a course in miracles. It is a required course.
The time for you to take it is now. You are ready and miracles are
needed.

<sup>P.2</sup> Pray for all those in need of miracles. To pray is to
ask. But for what are you asking? This is the first instruction in this
course in miracles.  All are in need of miracles. This is the first step
in miracle readiness: asking for all to be included in what we do here.
By praying for all those in need of miracles you are praying for all to
learn as you learn, you are asking to link your mind with all minds. You
are asking to end your separated state and learn in a state of unity.
This is a basic recognition that this is the only way you learn. 

<sup>P.3</sup> The separated self or the ego does not learn. Even when
the ego has taken many courses and received many teachings, the ego has
not learned but has merely become threatened. Spirit does not need a
course in miracles.  If the ego cannot learn and the spirit does not
need to, then who is this Course and all other such courses for?
Learning our true identity, the identity of the Self that is capable of
learning, is something everyone must do. Can the ego learn this? Never.
Does spirit need to?  No. Who, then, is this Course for? 

<sup>P.4</sup> This is a basic question that was not adequately answered
in A Course in Miracles. While a course in miracles is meaningless to
the ego and unnecessary to spirit it would seem to have no audience at
all if these are the only two states that exist. Since it is impossible
to be part spirit and part ego, assuming there would be such a state in
which learning could take place would be meaningless. 

<sup>P.5</sup> The world as a state of being, as a whole, has entered a
time, brought on largely by *A Course in Miracles*, in which readiness
for miracle-mindedness is upon it. *A Course in Miracles* opened a door
by threatening the ego. All those who, with egos weakened, walked this
world with thehope of leaving ego behind, with miracle-minded intent,
have awakened human beings to a new identity. They have ushered in a
time of ending our identity crisis. Not since Jesus walked the earth has
such a time been upon humankind.

<sup>P.6</sup> What is it in you that is capable of learning? What is it
in you that recognizes that ego is not what you are? What is it in you
that recognizes your spirit? What is it in you that hovers between two
worlds, the world of the ego’s dominion and that of spirit? What
recognizes the difference? The Christ in you.

<sup>P.7</sup> It is easy to imagine how the Christ in you differs from
your ego but not as easy to recognize how the Christ in you differs from
spirit.  The Christ in you is that which is capable of learning in human
form what it means to be a child of God. The Christ in you is that which
is capable of bridging the two worlds. This is what is meant by the
second coming of Christ.

<sup>P.8</sup> The ego is what you made. Christ is what God made. The
ego is your extension of who you think you are. Christ is God’s
extension of who He is. In order to end the need for learning, you must
know who you are and what this means. Where the original Course in
Miracles was a course in thought reversal and mind training, a course to
point out the insanity of the identity crisis and dislodge the ego’s
hold, this is a course to establish your identity and to end the reign
of the ego.

<sup>P.9</sup> There are still few who dare to believe in the glory of
who they are, few who can lay aside the idea that to think of themselves
in the light of God’s thought of them rather than their own is
arrogance. This is only because the ego is not yet and finally gone. You
are right not to desire to glorify the ego in any way. You know that the
ego cannot be glorified and that you would not want it to be. This is
why, while the ego remains, you cannot know who you are. The only glory
is of God and His creations. That you are among the creations of God
cannot be disputed. Thus all glory is due you. All glory is yours, and
your efforts to protect it from the ego’s reach are valiant but
unnecessary.  The ego cannot claim the glory that is yours.

<sup>P.10</sup> Many of you desire to be “foot soldiers,” to just live
the good life without claiming glory, without having any grand ideas
about yourselves. It is possible to do much good without recognizing who
you are, but it is impossible to be who you are, and you are what the
world is for. Your recognition of your Self and your recognition of your
brothers and sisters is what the world is for. To stop before this is
accomplished when it is in reach is every bit as insane as belief in the
ego. Ask yourself what it is that stops you. As humble as you seem to be
in your choice, you are still letting ego make your choice. This is not
humility but fear.

<sup>P.11</sup> The further teachings of the original Course were
designed to turn fear into love. When you think you can go only so far
and no further in your acceptance of the teachings of the Course and the
truth of your Self as God created you, you are abdicating love to fear.
You are perhaps making this world a better place but you are not
abolishing it.  <sup>I</sup>n your acceptance of doing good works and
being a good person, you are accepting ministry to those in hell rather
than choosing heaven. You accept what you view as possible and reject
what you perceive as impossible. You thus cling to the laws of man and
reject the laws of God. You claim your human nature and reject your
divine nature.

<sup>P.12</sup> What is this rejection but rejection of your Self? What
is this rejection but fear masquerading as humility?  What is this
rejection but rejection of God? What is this but a rejection of
miracles?

<sup>P.13</sup> You who have rejected your Self are likely to feel
increasingly burdened. Although an initial burst of energy may have
followed your reading of the Course or your discoveries of other forms
of the truth, although you may even have experienced what seemed to be
miracles happening “to” you, as you continued to reject your Self this
energy and these experiences that lightened your heart would have begun
to recede and to seem as distant and unreal as a mirage. All that you
retain is a belief in effort and a struggle to be good and to do good, a
belief that clearly demonstrates that you have rejected who you are.

<sup>P.14</sup> Oh, Child of God, you have no need to try at all, no
need to be burdened or to grow tired and weary. You who want to
accomplish much good in the world realize that only you can be
accomplished. You are here to awaken from your slumber. You are here not
to awaken to the same world, a world that seems a little more sane than
before but still governed by insanity, a world in which it seems
possible to help a few others but certainly not all others, but to
awaken to a new world. If all that you see changed within your world is
a little less insanity than before, then you have not awakened but still
are caught in the nightmare your ego has made. By choosing to reject
yourself you have chosen to try to make sense of the nightmare rather
than to awaken from it. This will never work.

<sup>P.15</sup> By rejecting who you are, you are demonstrating that you
think you can believe in some of the truth but not all of it. Many of
you have accepted, for instance, that you are more than your body while
retaining your belief in the body. You thus have confused yourself
further by accepting that you are two selves—an ego self represented by
the body—and a spirit self that represents to you an invisible world in
which you can believe but not take part. You thus have placed the ego at
odds with spirit, giving the ego an internal and invisible foe to do
battle with. This was hardly the purpose of any teachings of the truth
that have as their aim the exact opposite of this conflict-inducing
situation. The truth unites. It does not divide. The truth invites
peace, not conflict. Partial truth is not only impossible, it is
damaging. For sooner or later in this lopsided battle, the ego will win
out. The spirit as you have defined it is too amorphous, too lacking in
definition and believability to win this battle against what you
perceive as your reality.

<sup>P.16</sup> You who have come close to truth only to turn your back
and refuse to see it, turn around and look once again. You have traveled
your path and the end of the journey is in sight. You stand at the
precipice with a view of the new world glittering with all the beauty of
heaven set off at just a little distance in a golden light. When you
could have seen this sight you turned your back and sighed, looking back
on a world familiar to you, and choosing it instead. You do not see that
this choice, even made with every good intention of going back and
making a difference, is still a choice for hell when you could instead
have chosen heaven. Yet you know that choosing heaven is the only true
way to change the world. It is the exchange of one world for another.
This is what you fear to do. You are so afraid to let go of the world
that you have known that, even though it is a world of conflict,
sickness, and death, you will not exchange it, will not relinquish it.

<sup>P.17</sup> While God remains unknown to you and you remain unknown
to your Self, so too does heaven remain concealed. Thus, in turning your
back on heaven, you turn your back on your Self and God as well. Your
good intentions will not overcome the world and bring an end to hell. In
all the history of the world, many have done good, heroic, and at times
miraculous deeds without the world changing from a place of misery and
despair. What is more arrogant? To believe that you alone can do what
millions of others have not been able to do? Or to believe that you, in
union with God, can? What makes more sense? To choose to try again what
others have tried and failed to accomplish? Or to choose to leave behind
the old and choose a new way, a way in which you become the
accomplished, and in your accomplishment bring the new into being?

<sup>P.18</sup> What is the difference between your good intentions and
willing with God? The difference is in who you think you are and who God
knows you to be. While this difference remains, you cannot share your
will with God or do what God has appointed you to do. Who you think you
are reveals the choice that you have made. It is either a choice to be
separate from God or a choice to be one with God. It is a choice to know
yourself as you always have, or a choice to know your Self as God
created you. It is the difference between wanting to know God now, and
wanting to wait to know God until you have decided you are worthy or
until some other designated time, such as at death.

<sup>P.19</sup> What are good intentions but a choice to do what you
can, alone, by yourself, against great odds? This is why good intentions
so often fail to come to be at all, and why, when every effort has been
made, the outcome seldom seems worth the effort.  You cannot earn your
way to heaven or to God with your effort or your good intentions. You
cannot earn, and will not ever feel as if you have earned, the
designation of a person of such worth that you are deserving of all that
God would freely give. Give up this notion.

<sup>P.20</sup> You have decided that you know how to do good works but
that you do not know how to do what God asks of you. You think, if God
asked me to build a bridge I would build a bridge, and this is likely
true. Yet you will not become the bridge. You refuse to recognize that
the Christ in you provides the bridge that you need only walk across to
bridge the distance between heaven and hell, between your separated self
and union with God and all your brothers and sisters. You prefer to
think a good deed here, a bit of charity there, is more important. You
prefer to give up on yourself and to help others, without realizing that
you can help no others until you have helped yourself. You prefer
selflessness to self because this is your chosen way to abolish ego and
to please God.  This is not unlike the attitude of a good mother who
decides to sacrifice herself for her children, without realizing that
her sacrifice is not only unnecessary but undesirable.

<sup>P.21</sup> Your good intentions neither please nor displease God.
God simply waits for your return to heaven, for your acceptance of your
birthright, for you to be who you are.

<sup>P.22</sup> Another failure to accomplish lies at the other end of
the spectrum, with a concentration on self that seems to have no end
point and no limit to the interest it generates. While forgiveness and
the release of guilt are necessary, and while recognition of gifts and
what leads to joy cannot be done without, they are the point only to the
extent of making one ready for a new choice. Prolonged interest in self
can be as damaging as the selflessness of those intent on doing good
works. Rather than leading to knowledge of God, prolonged interest in
self can further entrench the ego.

<sup>P.23</sup> Seekers are but another category of those who at the
precipice act as if they have hit a wall rather than come across a
bridge. It is precisely the place at which you stopped that you must
return to. Those who continue to seek may have left teachings of the
Course or of one or another spiritual or religious tradition only to
find another and still another. For those intent on seeking there is
always more to seek, but those who find must stop to realize what they
have found and to realize that they seek no more.

<sup>P.24</sup> The Course speaks of patience that is infinite. God is
patient, but the world is not. God is patient for God sees you only as
you are. The Christ in you is also still and ever present. But the
weakening done your ego by whatever learning you have done has left room
for strength, a strength that entered as if by a little hole made in
your ego’s armor, a strength that grows, and grows impatient with delay.
It is not your ego that grows impatient for change, for your ego is
highly invested in things remaining the same. It is, rather, a spirit of
compassion that reels at the senselessness of misery and suffering. A
spirit that seeks to know what to do, a spirit that does not believe in
the answers it has been given.

<sup>P.25</sup> The way to overcome the dualism that threatens even the
most astute of learners is through the Christ in you, through the One
who knows what it is to be God’s child and also to walk the earth as
child of man. This is not your helper, as the Holy Spirit is, but your
identity. While the Holy Spirit was properly called upon to change your
perception and show you the false from the true, your recognition of the
Christ in you is proper in this time of identification of your undivided
Self.

<sup>P.26</sup> Let us, for the moment, speak of the family of God in
terms of the family of man, in terms, in short, that you will recognize.
In the family of man, there are many families but it is called one
family, the family of man. It is called one species, the human species.
Within this family of man are individual families, and among them, that
which you call “your” family. A family has many members but it is called
one family. All of its members are descended from the same ancestors,
the same bloodline. Within that bloodline are genes that carry
particular traits and predispositions. A child of one family may
resemble the child of another distant relative or a relative who lived
and died many years previously. You see nothing odd or foreign in this.
This is the nature of family, as you understand family. And beyond the
physical nature of families, the bloodlines and the ancestors, what
holds the family together as one is love. The family is, in fact, the
only place where unconditional love is seen as acceptable. Thus, no
matter how good one child is perceived to be and how bad another is
perceived to be, the love of the parent for the child is the same. A son
or daughter does not earn the love that is given him or her, and this
too is seen as acceptable and even “right.”

<sup>P.27</sup> Obviously, the nature of God is different than the
nature of man.  God does not have physical form and does not produce
physical offspring.  God does, however, have a son, a child, an
offspring, who must exist in some form like unto the Father. Within the
story of the human race there is a story about the coming of God’s son,
Jesus Christ, who was born, grew into a man, died and rose again to live
on in some form other than that of a man. Those who believe the story
have accepted that Jesus was God’s son before he was born, while he
walked the earth, and after he died and resurrected. Whether this is
your belief or not, it comes close to the truth in a form that you can
understand. Jesus is simply the example life, the life that demonstrated
what it means to be God’s child.

<sup>P.28</sup> Just as there is part of you that thinks that you are
undeserving and made for suffering and strife, there is another part of
you that knows this is not true. Think back, and you will remember that,
from the earliest of ages you have known that life is not as it is meant
to be; that you are not as you are meant to be. The part of you that
rages against injustice, pain, and horror does so from a place that does
not accept and will never accept that these things are what are meant
for you or for those who walk this world with you. And yet your history,
in which you so believe, will tell you that the world has always been
thus and that there is no escape from it. In such a world the question
should not be why do so many take their lives, but why do so few.

<sup>P.29</sup> There are many forms of pain and horror, from physical
illnesses to torture to loss of love, and in between these many
frightful occurrences is the equally distressing life of the
purposeless, where hours pass endlessly in toil that is the cost of your
survival here. Even those who have studied much and learned the lessons
of the Course well, leave their learning and their teaching sit idly by
while they earn their living until the dust that has collected upon it
obscures it from their sight. This is the cost of turning back when
heaven could have been reached, the cost in continuing to believe in the
laws of the world that govern the survival of the body. This is the way
of those who know this is not the way it is meant to be and then doubt
their knowing. This is the way it has always been, they cry. They lament
that they see but one real world while heaven waits just beyond their
willingness to proceed.

<sup>P.30</sup> You are the creation like unto your Father and the
family of man is like unto the family of God. Just as children grow in
your “real world” and leave their family, separate from their family to
begin their “own” life, so have you done as part of God’s family. In the
human family the separateness and independence that come with age are
seen as the way that things should be, and yet a return to the “family
of origin” is also seen as natural. Children go away for a time, eager
to assert their independence, only later to return. The return is the
symbol of maturity, acceptance, and often of forgiveness.

<sup>P.31</sup> What does it mean to believe in God? You recognize that
you cannot know God in the same way in which you know another human
being, and yet you keep seeking this type of knowing. Even with another
human being, knowing what they stand for, what their truth is, what
rules they obey, how they think and how what they think aligns with what
they do is the essence of knowing them.  God gave you the Word to know
Him by. God gave you the Word made flesh as an example to live by—an
example of a living God. What more than this is necessary? You seek form
when you already have content. Does this make any sense?

<sup>P.32</sup> You read what authors write and feel that you know not
only their characters, but them as well. Yet you meet an author face to
face and you can seldom see in them what you saw in their writing.  When
you meet an author face to face, you view their form. When you read
their words, you view their content. When you quit seeing with the ego’s
eyes, you quit seeing form and quit searching for it. You begin seeing
content.

<sup>P.33</sup> Content is all you have of God. There is no form to see,
yet in the content is the form revealed. This is true seeing. For
content is all and form is nothing.

<sup>P.34</sup> The content of God is love. Jesus embodied God by
embodying love.  He came to reverse the way God was thought of, to put
an end to seeing God in human terms of vengeance, punishment, and
judgment.

<sup>P.35</sup> Jesus did this not only by embodying God in human form,
but by giving a true rather than a false picture of power. Before the
coming of the Word made flesh, the incarnation, the only idea humankind
could draw of an all-powerful being was a being whose power resembled
the powerful among them. Jesus took such a stand against those with this
kind of power that he was put to death. But Jesus did not advocate for a
powerless people. Jesus taught true power, the power of love, a power
proven by the resurrection.

<sup>P.36</sup> Jesus, united with the Christ in you, is he who can
teach you who you are and how to live as who you are in a new world. He
can open heaven to you and walk you through its gates, there to exchange
this world at last for your true home. But it is not your body that will
pass through heaven’s gates, nor your body’s eyes that will view the new
world you will behold and take with you. To view a physical world of
dimension, shape, and scope like unto the old and hope to transport it
from one place to another would be delusional. The new world does not
have to do with form, but with content. A content that is as
transferable as an author’s words upon a page.

<sup>P.37</sup> How many would not travel to heaven if they could get on
a bus and be transported there?  Yet each of you holds within you the
power to reach heaven. Knowing your Self as who you really are is the
only thing that will allow you to quit fearing your power. Jesus
accepted his power and so brought the power of heaven to earth. This is
what the Christ in you can teach you to do. This is miracle-mindedness.
This is love.

<sup>P.38</sup> This is oneness. The Christ in you teaches only in the
sense of imparting knowledge that you already have and once again have
access to as you join with your own real Self. Once this is
accomplished, you are accomplished. Because you are complete. But if
your joining with Christ is the accomplishment and completion of all
lessons, who is he who provides the lessons? This is Jesus.

<sup>P.39</sup> The Christ in you is your shared identity. This shared
identity made Jesus one with Christ. The two names mean the same thing,
as oneness is what was always shared and always will be. You are
eternally one with Christ. The only way you can identify Jesus
differently is to relate to the Jesus who was a man, the Jesus who
existed in history.  This is the same way in which you are able to see
yourself—as a man or woman, as a being existing in a particular time in
history. This one- or at best three-dimensional nature of your seeing is
the nature of the problem. If you cannot see yourself “other than” as a
man or woman living in a particular place in a particular time, you
cannot see your Self. Thus Jesus comes to you again, in a way that you
can accept, to lead you beyond what you can accept to what is true.

<sup>P.40</sup> To tell someone, even a young child, that a caterpillar
becomes a butterfly is seemingly unbelievable. This does not make it any
less true. The butterfly, although some perceive it as being lovelier to
behold, is still the same being as the caterpillar. The caterpillar did
not cease to exist; it simply transformed into what it always was. Thus
it would seem as if the butterfly is both butterfly and caterpillar, two
separate things becoming one. You are well aware of the fact that if you
could not see the transformation take place “with your own two eyes,”
you would not believe that the two seemingly disparate creatures were
the same. Someone telling you this story of transformation without being
able to show you proof that you could see would be accused of making up
a fairytale for your amusement.

<sup>P.41</sup> How many of you see the story of your own self in this
same frame of mind? It is a nice fairytale, an acceptable myth, but
until your body’s eyes can behold the proof, this is what it will
remain. This is the insanity of the nightmare you choose not to awaken
from. It is as if you have said, I will not open my eyes until someone
proves to me that they will see when they are opened. You sit in
darkness awaiting proof that only your own light will dispel.

<sup>P.42</sup> Your willingness to learn is evident or you would not be
here. You have been told and told again that a little willingness is all
that is necessary.  Why do you seem then to have not advanced or to have
advanced only a little bit, when your willingness is mighty? Only
because you have not vanquished the ego. You learn and then you let the
ego come and take all you have learned from you again and still again.
<sup>I</sup>t is ingenious in its ways of getting you to turn back again
and still again, until you feel as if you are going in and out through a
revolving door.

<sup>P.43</sup> You were your Self before you began your learning, and
the ego cannot take your Self from you but only can obscure it. Thus the
teachings you need now are to help you separate the ego from your Self,
to help you learn to hear only one voice.

<sup>P.44</sup> This time we take a direct approach, an approach that
seems at first to leave behind abstract learning and the complex
mechanisms of the mind that so betray you. We take a step away from
intellect, the pride of the ego, and approach this final learning
through the realm of the heart. This is why, to end confusion, we call
this course *A Course of Love*.

