---
chapter: "15"
title: "Chapter 15: Becoming and the Principles of Creation"
---

<sup>15.1</sup> Before creation of the new can begin, you must come to
know the way of creation as it *is*. It has not always been the same,
and it will not be the same in the future as it is now. But there are
certain principles that govern creation. These principles are like unto
the patterns that were created for your time of learning and that will
be applied anew to the creation of new patterns for the new time that is
upon us. 

<sup>15.2</sup> The first principle of creation is that of movement.
Rigor mortis, or the stiffness of death, is nothing but a lack of
movement, a lack of movement of the blood through the veins and the
consequent stiffening of the muscles. The Dead Sea is a “dead” sea
because of lack of movement.  Thus these are excellent examples to
illustrate the principle of movement as life itself, the idea of lack of
movement as lack of life.

<sup>15.3</sup> Life and the movement of *being* into form is what
occurred when God “spoke” and the Word came into being. Movement is
energy, the life force of creation and of being, both in unity and in
time. By being you are *in* movement. By being you are an expression of
being. 

<sup>15.4</sup> The second principle of creation, then, is that being
*is*. It is what *is* and it is the expression of what *is*. 

<sup>15.5</sup> Life is movement through the force of expression. The
third principle of creation is thus expression.

<sup>15.6</sup> These are not, however, separate principles, but a
single unifying principle of wholeness: Movement, being, expression. One
did not occur before the other, as they are not separate. There was
movement *into* being and an expression *of* being. But what was there
to move before there was being? This is the way the mind looks at
principles, one coming after the other and building upon each other.
This is not the way of creation, which is why these principles of unity
must be seen as the undivided wholeness of the principle of unity before
creation of the new can begin. 

<sup>15.7</sup> Let me use the creation story of what was once my
tradition as an example. Before God “said” anything, a mighty wind swept
over the wasteland and the waters. The wind, which is as great a
signifier of movement as rigor mortis is of lack of movement, is the
first element mentioned in this particular creation story. This first
mention of movement is literally present in all creation stories because
there is no story without movement. There is no story to tell without
movement.  Nothing is happening. So movement might be likened to
something happening—to the beginning, the beginning of the story and the
beginning of creation. 

<sup>15.8</sup> Then God, a being, spoke. Here we have both the
introduction of a being and the continuation of movement. Speaking
denotes not only a speaker, the being, but the movement of sound. Then
we are told the content of the words: It was said, “Let there be light.”
More movement.  Only when movement, being, and *expression* came
together, however, was there light. Light might be seen, in this
example, as the first act of creation. 

<sup>15.9</sup> I repeat this story not as fact, or to still any doubts
about these principles of creation, but to give you an example that is
easily understood, an example of the way in which these principles work
together. What I have left out of this story, the formless wasteland,
the earth and the water that the wind first swept across and upon which
the light first descended, is an interesting omission, made by many.
What were the earth and water if they were not form? 

<sup>15.10</sup> They were barren form. Form unable to create or bear
fruit.  Form was simply *barren* form before movement swept across it
and animated it with the attention and awareness of spirit—with sound,
light, and expression. Could these barren forms not be compared to the
forms of the not yet elevated? What if the existence of form was seen to
predate the animation of that form with life and spirit? Would this not
be consistent with what we attempt to do here? With our continuing work
of creation? Would this not even be consistent with spirit existing in
every living form from the beginning of *time* until the end of *time*?

<sup>15.11</sup> Time is what begins and ends. Time is what began when
life took on existence in form and space. It is temporal rather than
eternal.  Alongside it, in the state of unity, rests all that is
eternal, all that is real. What is real is but another way of saying
what is true. What is true is eternal life, not temporal life. There are
no degrees of life.  One form is not more alive than another. All that
lives contains the breath or wind of spirit, which is eternal and
complete.

<sup>15.12</sup> Expression, movement, and being are about what is
eternal passing through what is temporal. Thus I return you to the
lesson on “pass through” which was contained within this Course. The
Course sought to teach you to develop a relationship with all that
passes through you.  Now is the time when the fruit of those efforts
will be reaped. For what passes through you now is a relationship
without end. What passes through you now is the eternal come to replace
the temporal. 

<sup>15.13</sup> To try to capture the eternal would be like trying to
catch the wind. But just as the wind can power many machines endlessly
when it is allowed pass-through, so too can spirit endlessly empower
form when it is allowed pass-through. 

<sup>15.14</sup> You might say that the wind comes and the wind goes. It
blows in mighty gales and whispers in gentle breezes. Any sailor knows
the wind is fickle. But any sailor also knows the wind never dies. 

<sup>15.15</sup> You have all been sailors here, animated by the wind of
spirit and at one time sailing—flying along with the wind at your
back—and at another time sitting still or seemingly bobbing along with
no apparent direction. You have attempted to build better sails to catch
the wind, or motors to replace it, never realizing its constant and
continual presence only needs to be allowed to pass through you to be in
relationship with you, never realizing that this is, in truth, what
animates you, that this is that without which you cease to be. Continual
and unblocked and aware pass-through is what we now consider.  

<sup>15.16</sup> You have been prepared for this by the realization that
your thinking mind will no longer be necessary as your access to unity,
or Christ-consciousness, is maintained and sustained. Let us begin with
the idea of maintenance and proceed to the idea of sustenance.

<sup>15.17</sup> Maintenance is thought of most often as keeping what
you have, and as keeping what you have in good repair. It is not often
thought of as a lasting measure, which is the primary difference between
the idea of maintenance and the idea of sustenance. 

<sup>15.18</sup> Maintenance assumes that you already have something of
value, and that you wish to take care of it so that it will continue to
be of service to you. Maintenance implies a certain attitude, an
attitude of care, vigilance, anticipation, and a knowing that without
this care, vigilance, and anticipation, the value of what you seek to
maintain will be lost. Thus we look at maintenance as the work, or
relationship, with the desired service. In this example, maintenance is
what you give in order to receive the maximum connection to unity that
is possible in this time. You realize that some breaks in service will
still occur, that maintenance will not make the connection perfect, but
that it will keep it of service to you. 

<sup>15.19</sup> And so we begin with the idea of maintenance of your
relationship with unity. You have experienced unity now and you wish it
to continue to serve you. You thus must strive to maintain the
conditions that will allow it to do so.  This is, as with all
maintenance, a temporary measure, but one you desire to have discussed,
just as we discussed parameters to your state of conscious awareness. 

<sup>15.20</sup> To move from maintenance to sustenance is our goal,
however. To *sustain* is to keep in existence. To recognize unity as
sustenance is to recognize it as that which sustains life.  Sustaining
unity or Christ-consciousness is being done with the need to maintain
conditions that allow it to be present. Maintenance will lead to
sustenance. 

<sup>15.21</sup> Let this idea enter you now. You have left behind the
conditions of learning. Why? Because they are no longer needed. The time
of learning has ended. When this time of becoming has ended, the
conditions that allow your acceptance and discovery of all that is
available within unity, or Christ-consciousness, will no longer be
needed. This will be as big a step as was the step that left behind the
conditions of learning, a step from which you at times feel as if you
are still reeling. 

<sup>15.22</sup> This step was like the final step after your ascent of
the highest mountain. These dialogues might be seen as taking place
there, with the guide and the team of climbers who accompanied you on
your ascent. And at this highest point of the highest peak of the
highest mountain, you pause and become accustomed to the thinner air,
the view from above, to what you now can see. You catch your breath and
let the wind of spirit fill your lungs once again. 

<sup>15.23</sup> Here is where you work in relationship to maintain what
you have learned, for you know that when you return to the level ground
from which you climbed, you will be different as a result of having made
your ascent. The hard work is done. What you gain here you gain from
what is beyond effort and beyond learning, and from the maintenance of
the state in which you reject the conditions of learning. You maintain
here, in short, all of the conditions necessary to reach your goal.  

<sup>15.24</sup> What you will have gained on your return will be the
goal itself—the sustenance—for what you will have gained will never
leave you but will sustain you forevermore.

