---
chapter: "10"
title: "Chapter 10: The Goal and the Accomplishment of the Elevated Self of Form"
---

<sup>10.1</sup> What is found outside of the boundary of the personal
self in the wider circle of unity is timeless. What comes to you in the
form of natural abilities or talents, as ideas, as imagination, as
inspiration, instinct, intuition, as vision, or as calling, are ways of
knowing that come to you, and through you, outside of the pattern of
learning.

<sup>10.2</sup> Learning is about the transfer of knowledge that was
gained in the time of learning, through the process of learning. Notice
the inability of teaching or learning to call forth talents, ideas,
imagination, inspiration, instinct, intuition, vision, or calling. You
may believe that teaching and learning appropriately work with and
enable the *use* of abilities such as these, but you also know that
these means are limited in what they can do and that they can hinder as
well as enhance the creative expression of these givens. 

<sup>10.3</sup> You think that the use you put these givens to, what you
*do* with them, how you express them in the world, is your unique and
individual accomplishment. Such it is. But when you also think that it
is your hard work and diligence, your effort and struggle, that bring
the expression of these givens forward, you think in error and limit
your expression in much the same ways that the effort of teaching and
learning limits them.  It is your joyous acceptance of the already
accomplished state of these givens that allows expression of what is
given to truly come through you and express the Self, because joyous
expression expresses the Self of unity rather than the self of
separation, the Self of elevated form rather than the personal self. 

<sup>10.4</sup> Now you might be thinking, here, that while these givens
come from the realm of unity, your expression of these givens, since
that expression exists in the realm of time and space and involves the
work and time of your form in your form’s separate reality, is not of
union but of the individual self. You may feel that to think of this in
any other way will leave you with no individual, personal
accomplishment, nothing to be proud of, nothing to call your own. You
thus must begin to realize that the bringing forth of the accomplishment
that already exists in unity is your new work, the work of the Self of
union, the work that can fill you with the true joy of true
accomplishment, because it is your real work—work with what is.

<sup>10.5</sup> Working with what is in unity is not work but
relationship. You are called to realize your relationship with what is
given from unity. It is in that relationship, the relationship *between*
what *is* and the expression of what *is* by the elevated Self of form,
that the new is created. What is becomes new by becoming sharable in
form—or in other words, what *is* continues to *become* through the
continuation of relationship and the creation of new relationships. In
this way, sharing in relationship becomes the goal and the
accomplishment of the elevated Self of form, the means through which the
Self of union is known even in the realm of separation, and thus what
draws others from separation to union. 

<sup>10.6</sup> The goal and relationship of the elevated Self of form
is thus timeless, for it draws from the realm of unity and returns to
the realm of unity. This is an expression of the Biblical injunction to
“Go forth and multiply.” It is about increase. To be content with
*personal* or *individual* understanding or experience of what is given
is to not complete the cycle of giving and receiving as one. What is
given must be received. What is received must be given. This is the way
of increase and multiplication. This is the way of creation.

<sup>10.7</sup> In this time of Christ, discovery is about acceptance of
your true way of knowing, a way that existed prior to the time of
learning and that has always existed. When put into practice and allowed
to replace the pattern of learning, this way of discovery will be a
constant coming to know of what is as well as a constant expansion of
what *is*, or a constant expansion of creation—creation, in short, of
the new.

