---
chapter: "4"
title: "Chapter 4: The New You"
---

<sup>4.1</sup> This Covenant is the fulfillment of the agreement between
you and God. The agreement is for you to *be* the *new*. As you are new,
so too is God, for you are one, if not the same. As you are new, so too
is the world, for you are one, if not the same. As you are new, so are
your brothers and sisters, for they, too, are one, if not the same. 

<sup>4.2</sup> While not the same, you also are not different. The
differences you saw during the time of learning, differences that made
you feel as if each being stood separate and alone, you are now called
to see no more.  In unity you are whole and inseparable, one living
organism now raised above the level of the organism as you become aware
of unity of form. 

<sup>4.3</sup> It is time now for this idea to be accepted, for if it is
not, you will remain in the prison you have created. 

<sup>4.4</sup> Prison is an excellent example of a system you created
with your faulty perception. As with all systems, it reflects an inward
state and shows you what becomes of all of those who see not what it
means to be neither different nor the same but to be one. 

<sup>4.5</sup> For the moment, disregard any idea you may have of there
being those who deserve the prison system you have developed and any
arguments you would cite about the heinous crimes of some. Think instead
of prison simply becoming a way of life for those who are incarcerated
there. Each of you has had an imprisoned personal self. Each of you who
have entered Christ-consciousness has had the cell door and the prison
gate thrown open and a new world offered. If you do not “accept” this
opportunity, you remain incarcerated in a system that tells you when you
will awaken, how you will spend your day and when you will retire. You
remain at the mercy of those who are incarcerated along with you. You
remain at the mercy of those who would have power over you, and you
remain subject to the laws of man. 

<sup>4.6</sup> I tell you truthfully that until you are living as who
you are and are doing what you love, you are in prison. This prison is
as much of your own making as are the actual prison systems that
developed when shape and form was given to what you fear and what you
believe will protect you. 

<sup>4.7</sup> Just as an actual prisoner, when released from prison,
must adjust to a life in which his or her actions are no longer
restricted artificially, you must adjust to your new freedom.  Your life
has been artificially restricted by the prison you have created of it,
and the actual prison system merely mirrors this restriction on a grand
scale for all to see and look upon with dread.  For most, the prison
system is a very successful deterrent. The thought of time in prison
fills the mind with fear. And yet those who are imprisoned often become
so acclimated to prison life, that life on the “outside” is no longer
seen as desirable. How can this be? 

<sup>4.8</sup> A life of artificial structure is all any of you have
known. An internally structured life will quickly replace the life of
the inmate if you will but let it do so. Even those who actually are
incarcerated in the prison system you have made are free to follow an
internally structured life to a greater extent than many of those who
call themselves free. 

<sup>4.9</sup> Your prison was created by the separated thoughts of the
separated thought “system.” Systems, as you may recall, are the result
of your attempts to externalize the patterns contained within. Patterns
are both of learning and of design. 

<sup>4.10</sup> Let’s look at each of these terms separately so that we
see the nature of existence in the same way and speak the same language
while discussing it. 

<sup>4.11</sup> Let us begin by coming to agreement about the idea of
divine design. This divine design could also be called creation, and
where we have spoken of creation previously, divine design was also
spoken of.  Here I am quite confident that you have either seen and
learned enough during your time as a learning being that you accept that
a divine design created the universe and all that is in it, or that you
trust enough in the wisdom of your heart, that you know that this is so.
Either way, you may still *believe* in a divine design without accepting
that a divine design exists and that you are part of it.  Remember that
our goal here is to deny the old and accept the new. In this case, the
old you would deny is the idea of a purposeless existence, a universe
with no divine order, a life in which you are at the mercy of fate. The
new idea you are asked to accept is that existence is purposeful, that
the universe exists in divine order, and that your life is part of that
divine design. 

<sup>4.12</sup> Divine patterns are the patterns that made your
existence in form possible as well as the patterns that have made your
return to your true identity possible.  These patterns are both external
and internal.  External divine patterns include the observable forms
that make up your world, everything from the planet on which you exist
to the stars in the sky, from the body you seem to inhabit to the animal
and plant life that exists around you.  From the daintiest and most
intricately laced snowflake to the stem of a plant to the workings of
the human brain, a divine pattern is evident and should not be beyond
your belief. Despite the differences in what you see, think, and feel,
there is but one external divine pattern that created the observable
world, and only one internal divine pattern that created the internal
world. The internal divine pattern was that of learning. 

<sup>4.13</sup> The two patterns, the internal and the external, were
created together to exist in a complementary fashion. Both of these
divine patterns are being newly recreated and we will talk much more of
them and of the creative time we are now entering. Thus far, we are
merely working together to create a pattern of acceptance to replace the
pattern of learning. 

<sup>4.14</sup> Systems of thought are both divinely inspired and
products of the separated self. The idea of giving and receiving as one
might be thought of as a divinely inspired system of thought. In such a
way of thinking, one would take the internal thought pattern, enhance it
with the external pattern, and by seeing the unity and cooperation of
all, understand and live according to the system of thought of giving
and receiving being one. Systems of thought are thus the foundation upon
which how you live arises. The truth is a system of thought. It exists
in wholeness and has always been available.

<sup>4.15</sup> Systems of thought that arose from the separated self
are those you have accepted as the truth. Some of these systems of
thought were part of the divine pattern. Contrast is one such system. As
a learning being, you accepted that you learned through contrast,
knowing that contrast was provided for your learning. It was upon the
foundation of this and other thought systems that your perception
developed. Through contrast, you identified and classified the world
around you based upon the differences, or contrast that you saw. 

<sup>4.16</sup> Other systems of thought were not part of the divine
pattern. The ego is one such system. It may seem peculiar to think of
the ego as a system, and we have heretofore referred to both the ego and
to the ego’s thought system, but the ego is quite rightly seen as a
system in and of itself. It is thought externalized and given an
identity you but falsely believed to be yourself. From this one
externalized thought pattern came most of your false ideas, ideas that
made it difficult even for the divinely inspired thought systems to
provide the learning they were designed to impart.  Such is the case
with the system of learning through contrast, since when the ego entered
with its false ideas and judgment, contrast did not always provide the
lessons it was meant to provide. In addition, believing the ego had
become an externalized self took you, the true Self and the true
learner, out of the learning loop.  Obviously these systems, built as
they were upon patterns now being recreated, are part of the old. 

<sup>4.17</sup> Externalized patterns, or systems, were also built from
the systems of thought that have been your foundation, the basic
building blocks of what you have seen as reality. As such, these systems
too are obviously of the old. 

<sup>4.18</sup> Just as obviously, all we are left with is divine
design. All we are left with is what was given: A divine universe, a
divine existence.  That divine universe, our divine existence, is now
recreating the patterns that served the time of learning. What was
learned in the instant in which you came to know your Self is all that
learning was for. Let us not dwell any longer on why this has taken so
long or on the suffering that occurred during the time of learning. This
would be like dwelling on the inmate’s life as an inmate once he has
been freed. Let us simply create a new structure around the new pattern
of acceptance, a structure that will provide you with the home on Earth
you have so long sought and used your faulty systems to but attempt to
replicate. 

<sup>4.19</sup> I speak of structure here not as a thing—not as a
building in which to dwell or as a set of rules or instructions to
follow in order to build the new—but as structure that will provide you
with parameters in which to begin to experience your new freedom. It is
your questions and concerns that have led me to speak of such, for it is
you who have felt such as this is needed. The unlimited freedom offered
you is too vast for your comfort. Thus without limiting this freedom at
all, let us simply speak of a place and a way to begin to experience it,
and of a place and a way to begin to create the new. 

<sup>4.20</sup> This place and this way begins at the prison doors,
begins, as we said earlier, with acceptance of the new and denial of the
old.  Turn your back on the prison of your former existence and do not
look at it again. Do not long for its old structure or the false
security you came to feel at times within it. Do not look for a new
structure with barred windows and doors to keep you safe. Do not seek
someone to tell you anew what to do with who you are now that you are no
longer a prisoner. Do not give keys to a new jailer and ask to be taken
care of in exchange for your newfound freedom. 

<sup>4.21</sup> Instead see the world anew and rejoice in it, just as
you would have had you literally spent your life within a prison’s
walls. Breathe the sweet air of freedom. Be aware constantly of the sky
above your head and desire no more ceilings to shield you from it. 

<sup>4.22</sup> Beware of gifts offered in exchange for your newfound
freedom. A hungry ex-prisoner may soon come to feel the three meals a
day provided in the prison were gifts indeed. So too are the gifts many
of you have desired and still feel as if you need. If you have
imprisoned yourself in order to earn a living by doing work that brings
you no joy and allows you not to be who you are, then you are called to
walk away. If you are tempted by a relationship in which you cannot be
fully yourself because of the security it will provide, you are but
tempted by a false security, and are called to turn away. If you are
lured away from who you are by a drive to succeed, if you fear doing
what you want to do because you might fail, if you follow another’s path
and seek not your own, then you have imprisoned yourself for the “three
meals a day” of the old way. 

<sup>4.23</sup> What has this to do with structure and parameters?
Everything. You cannot deny the old and remain in the prison of the old.
You have asked, and because you have asked I am telling you, that the
permission you seek must come from your own heart and from your
commitment to the Covenant of the New. Once again I remind you that
there is no authority to whom you can turn. But in place of that
“outside” authority, I give you your own authority, an authority you
must claim in order for it to be your own. An authority you must claim
before your externally structured life can become an internally
structured life. 

<sup>4.24</sup> Let this acceptance of your own internal authority be
your first “act” of acceptance rather than learning. Turn to this as the
new pattern and to the thought system of giving and receiving as one.
Let the authority of the new be given and received. Become the author of
your own life. Live it as you feel called to live it. 

<sup>4.25</sup> We cannot build the new upon prison walls of old.
Whatever imprisons you must now be left behind. 

<sup>4.26</sup> Those of you now protesting having heard what you have
so longed to hear, protest no more. You cannot keep your prison and have
the new life that you long to have. You may have to examine just what it
is that imprisons you. You may find that it is attitude more so than
circumstance, or you may feel as if the walls that imprison you are so
sturdy and so long barred that they may as well be prison walls. You may
even be a prisoner in truth, and wonder how, save a grand escape, you
can proceed. But I tell you truthfully, your release is at hand and it
will come from your own authority and no place else.  It is up to you to
accept that your release is possible, to desire it without fear, to call
it into being. 

<sup>4.27</sup> Do you not see that you must begin with yourself? That
if you are unwilling to claim your freedom it will not claim you? 

<sup>4.28</sup> What is one, or in union with all, draws from the well
of divine design. You need not turn to old patterns or systems to
accomplish your release. You can only turn to what is, to what is left
now that the patterns and systems of learning are no longer.

<sup>4.29</sup> You accept that what has been given is available. You
accept and you receive. You realize that the first order of creation of
the new is restoration of the original order, or original design. As you
have been returned to your Self, now your life must be returned to where
it fits within the divine design, to where it is a life of meaning and
purpose.  This return is the return of wholeness. This return is not
selfish on your part, but magnanimous. It returns wholeness to you and
wholeness to the divine design. It returns creation to what it is.

<sup>4.30</sup> Understand—this cannot be fearful. This cannot fail.
This will not bring suffering but will end suffering. Your part is to
invite it and accept it when it comes. State your willingness, accept
the coming of your release, and prepare to leave your prison behind.
Invite this simply by inviting what brings you joy. Invite yourself
first to this new world, but leave not your brothers and sisters behind.
Invite them too. For those who are imprisoned are one with you, and need
but your release to find their own. 

<sup>4.31</sup> Dear brothers and sisters in Christ, I hear your
protests and the reasons that you feel must prevent you from the
acceptance I call you to. Yet as you fully accept that your right to
your inheritance, your right to be who you are, and your commitment to
the Covenant of the New, are one and the same, these reasons will
disappear. All the *different* reasons you would cite become what they
are—*one* reason, the *same* reason—and you will see that what is one is
neither the same nor different. You will see that there is *one* answer,
an answer different for everyone and yet the same for everyone. That
answer is acceptance of your Self. That answer is acceptance of the new
you.

