---
chapter: "9"
title: "Chapter 9: Awareness that Does Not Come from Thought"
---

<sup>9.1</sup> The door that is being opened to you here is the door of
awareness of what *is*, a door that swings open and closed on the hinges
of your thoughts. Thoughts are a greater boundary than the dot of your
body and a greater means of imprisonment than bars and walls. They are
why you do not see what *is* and are the reason that you continue to
desire to be provided with set answers. 

<sup>9.2</sup> The final thought reversal that was spoken of in the
section on acceptance is what is spoken of here. There you were asked to
become aware of what imprisons you, only to have it later suggested that
what you think imprisons you may not be what imprisons you at all. That
you think is what imprisons you. 

<sup>9.3</sup> You continue to think that your desire to know who you
are calls you to think about who you are and in that thinking to come up
with a definition of who you are, a truth of who you are, a certainty
about who you are. You have been led to see that this desire has always
been with you, and you have thought it is the very desire that, once
defined and acted upon, would fulfill you, allow you to be who you truly
are, end your confusion, and give you peace to usher in the new. 

<sup>9.4</sup> But you have thought about this desire to know who you
are in one way or another all of your life without reaching the place of
fulfillment you have sought. Even now, when you have learned all that
you are in need of learning, the pattern, even of your wholeheartedness,
remains one of thought. This pattern is what the new patterns of
acceptance and discovery that we are beginning to lay out here are going
to replace. 

<sup>9.5</sup> Thought is a practice and a pattern of the separated and
thus learning self. When it was said within this Course that you are an
idea of God, and when ideas were spoken of as if they were synonymous
with thought, this was an accurate and truthful way of expressing what
was true for you as a learning being.

<sup>9.6</sup> But your reality has changed, and with that change, new
patterns apply. This does not mean that the truth has changed, but that
you have changed; and with your change, the truth, while it remains the
truth, can now be presented in a way that speaks to who you are now
rather than who you were when you began *A Course of Love*. 

<sup>9.7</sup> As we continue, you may feel as if contradictory things
are being said, such as being called to consider what imprisons you and
then being called to reconsider. The call is still the same, but the
means by which you are considering the call has changed. Thus there is
no contradiction although there may at times seem to be. 

<sup>9.8</sup> This may seem as well to be inconsistent with the
teaching of “A Treatise on the Art of Thought.” If thought is what
imprisons you, why would the “art of thought” be taught? You must
continually remember your newness and the different aim toward which we
now work. The aims we clearly embraced together when you were still a
learning being were meant to allow you to come to know your true
identity. “A Treatise on the Art of Thought” was but a forerunner to
what we now will embrace together. It was a means and an end. 

<sup>9.9</sup> The same is true of the beliefs set forth in “A Treatise
on the Nature of Unity and Its Recognition”. What was taught in order to
aid your “recognition” will clearly be different from what is revealed
once that recognition has been brought about. 

<sup>9.10</sup> Just as the “Art of Thought” led to abilities beyond the
thinking of the ego-mind, the beliefs of the “Treatise on Unity” were
meant to lead beyond the need for beliefs, and “A Treatise on the
Personal Self” meant to lead beyond the personal self. Thus the
Treatises were not inconsistent with our aims here.  Learning always has
as its goal leading the learner *beyond* learning.  With “A Treatise on
the New” we established what lies beyond learning.  Now, as we embrace
the new together, it must be realized again and yet again, that the new
cannot be learned. In other words, it must be realized that you cannot
come to know the new, or to create the new, through the means of old,
including the means of thought. 

<sup>9.11</sup> We thus return to discovery and continue to expand the
territory of your conscious awareness. We do this by discussing now the
nature of ideas as opposed to the nature of thoughts. 

<sup>9.12</sup> Like the natural abilities you discovered existed within
you prior to the time of learning, ideas are also discoveries that you
make, discoveries that exist apart from learning. Ideas “come to you.”
They are given and received. They are surprising and pleasing in nature.
You may think that they are the result of learning, of thoughts you have
contemplated and struggled with. You may think that all of your previous
learning and thinking merely resulted eventually in a new idea being
birthed, but this is not the case. Heredity can be cited as a cause for
talent, but what is heredity but that which already exists within you?
So too is it with an idea. An idea already exists within you, but is
awaiting its birth *through* you. 

<sup>9.13</sup> This is how you must now come to see your form; it is
that through which what already exists, what is already accomplished,
comes or passes through by means of the expression of your form and the
interaction of your form with all you are in relationship with. 

<sup>9.14</sup> If we return to the image of the body as the dot in the
wider circle and accept that your discovery of your natural talent or
ability and your discovery of new ideas are discoveries of something
that already existed beyond the dot of the body; and if you accept that
these ideas that already exist were able to pass through you in order to
gain expression in form; then you are beginning to see, on a small
scale, the action that, on a large scale, will become the new way.

