---
chapter: "14"
title: "Chapter 14: New Frontiers Beyond the Body and Mind, Form and Time"
---

<sup>14.1</sup> Discovery is more, of course, than the acceptance of
your accomplishment and these beginning steps into the real state of
unity.  Discovery is also consistent with the way most of you have
thought of it throughout your lifetime. It is, in other words,
consistent with the action and the adventure of discovery within the
world around you.

<sup>14.2</sup> Here it will be helpful to keep in mind the idea of “as
within, so without.” We are not leaving the Self to explore, because the
Self is the source and cause of exploration as well as the source and
cause of discovery. And yet the Self is far more than you have
experienced as yourself in the past. 

<sup>14.3</sup> The Self is not separate from anything, not from
anything in the physical world or anything in the state of unity.  This
is why the key to unlocking the secrets of all you might want to know
before beginning the creation of the new are the ideas we have just
explored, ideas of how what is not of the body can still be known to
you. And this is why this exploration and discovery needs to be invited
and experienced *before* you become partners in the creation of the new.

<sup>14.4</sup> Let me remind you again of your invulnerability and the
cautions given within this Course concerning testing this
invulnerability. In a certain sense, these cautions are now lessened.
While you still are not to view your invulnerability as a testing ground
against fate, you will, to a certain extent, need to remember your
invulnerability in order to be a real explorer, and to fully participate
in the discovery that lies beyond the body and mind, form and time. You
will need to put into practice the suspension of belief that was spoken
of earlier. You will need, in short, to set aside the known in order to
discover the unknown.

<sup>14.5</sup> I would suggest beginning this exploration with simple
questions posed during the course of your normal life. Questions such
as, “What might this situation look like if I *forgot* everything I have
previously known about similar situations, and looked at this in a new
way?” Questions such as, “Do I really need to worry about this
situation, or can I *affect* this situation simply by not worrying about
it and allowing it to be and unfold as it will?” Questions such as,
“While I realize that the facts would tell me this or that is true, I
wonder what would happen if I disregarded the facts and was open to this
being something else?” These questions could be asked in situations as
commonplace as balancing the checkbook, or as momentous as a doctor’s
diagnosis of a disease. These questions could be asked when
decision-making seems to be called for, and when plans seem to need to
be made. 

<sup>14.6</sup> One of the major benefits of questions such as these is
that they can circumvent the usual thinking you would apply to these
situations.  They can circumvent the labeling of many situations as
problems or crises. They can leave the way open for revelation. 

<sup>14.7</sup> It has been said often that revelation is of God, but
remember now that God is not “other than” and that the God who seemed so
distant from you when you abided in separation can now be heard and seen
and felt in your experiences of unity.  

<sup>14.8</sup> Your openness will not only leave the way open for
revelation but for cooperation. Cooperation comes from the All of All
being in harmony and relationship. When this harmony and relationship
isn’t realized or accepted is when you believe you have need of planning
rather than receiving, when you believe you have cause for stress and
effort rather than for just being open to what comes. 

<sup>14.9</sup> Your awareness of the harmony and cooperation that
naturally extend from the state of unity in which all exist along with
you, was advanced by the idea of acceptance you took to heart earlier,
and paves the way for discovery as a constant coming to know and coming
to be. 

<sup>14.10</sup> Coming to know is the precursor of coming to be. The
precursor to manifestation. The precursor to creation of the new. It
paves the way much as each step of learning that was needed in the time
of learning paved the way for the next and then the next. But while I
say “much as,” this is only to provide you with a way to understand
this, for learning is incremental and discovery is not.  Learning took
place in parts in an effort to lead to wholeness.  Discovery comes to
you in wholeness. So these steps are not about parts or levels but about
the expansion of your awareness of what is. 

<sup>14.11</sup> To expand is to open “out,” to spread “out,” to
increase, to *become*. It is, for us, about bringing “out” what is
within. As you become aware “within” your Self, you enable the expansion
of awareness into the world. As within, so without. An explorer seeking
a new continent to “discover” first became aware “within” of the
possibility of the discovery of something more. The awareness “within”
thus became awareness “without.” 

<sup>14.12</sup> Becoming is all about a movement into form or
manifestation. You already are manifest in form, and so the idea of
*becoming* that has been with humankind throughout time must signal a
recognition that what you are is not complete, has not yet become whole,
has not been fully birthed. Your forms are complete in the physical
sense of sustaining life. Your form was birthed and you have celebrated
many birth “days” since your actual birth, progressing from youth to
adolescence to maturity, as well as many days of birthing new aspects of
the self, all without *becoming* more fully who you are. 

<sup>14.13</sup> Again, these ideas can be likened to the ideas put
forth in “A Treatise on Unity and Its Recognition” when it was said that
“a treasure that you do not as yet recognize is going to be recognized.
Once recognized it will begin to be regarded as an ability. And finally,
through experience, it will become your identity.” That *treasure* is
the new way of thought put forth in “A Treatise on the Art of Thought”,
the thought that is the miracle, or miracle-readiness, the thought that
comes of unity and that extends and expresses itself through your form,
thus elevating the self of form.  It is awareness, acceptance, and
discovery of what is beyond form that allows the beginning of the
transformation of what is beyond form into expression in form.
Awareness, acceptance, and discovery are, in short, what allow form to
*become* the *more* it has so long been seeking to become. 

<sup>14.14</sup> Thus, what is discovered is discovered in the state of
unity. It is discovered by means of your *awareness* of your access to
the state of unity, as well as by what you discover there, and only
*becomes* through the expression you give it. Here *becomes* could be
stated further further as what becomes known and sharable in
relationship, what becomes actualized through the expression of
thoughts, feelings, art, beauty, kind interactions, or miracles. What is
real in the state of unity is what is real, yet you have known this
reality not, even though it is the more subtle memory of this state that
is behind your striving to become.  Now you are beginning to see the
vastness of what is meant by creation of the new. What is meant by
creation of the new is creation of a new reality. 

<sup>14.15</sup> This reality begins with awareness of what is beyond
body and mind, form and time. It proceeds to this awareness being
accepted, adopted as an ability, and then to becoming your new identity.
It proceeds to the transformation we have spoken of, to the act of
becoming the elevated Self of form. You are thus entering the time of
becoming, the time of becoming the new you which must precede creation
of the new *world*. For as it has been said: As within, so without. 

<sup>14.16</sup> Being whole is being present. Being whole is being all
you are.  Being whole is being present as all you are. When this occurs
you are All in All, One in being with your Father. 

<sup>14.17</sup> This wholeness of being is what lies beyond body and
mind, form and time. *Becoming* the elevated Self of form is becoming
whole, and will be the *way* in which source and cause *transform* body
and mind, form and time.

