---
chapter: "5"
title: "Chapter 5: True Representation"
---

<sup>5.1</sup> Within this Course your “imitation” of creation was often
spoken of.  This was about your ability to “remember” much of creation
in a non-cognitive, intuitive way. It was also about the minor
distortions that occurred between this non-cognitive memory and how you
acted upon it, distortions that created major departures from the nature
of creation. 

<sup>5.2</sup> These distortions occurred as you assigned meaning or
“truth” to things, truly believing in your ability to do so. You thus
determined what the world around you was meant to represent. It was in
much the same way that the ego came to represent you. 

<sup>5.3</sup> What we are doing now is returning the world to its true
representation. As was said in “A Treatise on the Personal Self”, there
is a huge difference between a true representation and a false
representation. While the false representation of the ego self led to
the world you see, it did not change the truth but only created
illusion. Thus the truth is still available to be seen. 

<sup>5.4</sup> The world without was created as a true representation of
the world within, and as you become aware of the truth represented in
all that encompasses and surrounds you, the boundaries between the inner
and outer world will diminish and eventually cease to be. 

<sup>5.5</sup> Let me provide you with an example that illustrates how
one aspect of what was created in the pattern of learning, while not
being seen in the way it was intended, still represents what *is* and
thus contains all meaning or the truth. 

<sup>5.6</sup> When two bodies join and joy results from this joining,
this is form mimicking content—form representing what “is.” The form was
created in order to show—to teach—that joining is the way. Think of the
word *desire* and its association with sex. To desire someone is to
desire joining.  This desire was created to remind you—to point the
way—to your true desire for your true identity as a being joined in
oneness. This seeking of completion through oneness, this joining, is a
true representation that shows you that completion does not come of
standing alone but of joining, as love does not come alone but in
relationship. 

<sup>5.7</sup> You have determined sex to be the ultimate fulfillment of
love and called it “making love.” If it were painful rather than
pleasurable, if you did not lose yourself and experience completion, you
would not desire it.  Sex, experienced for this pleasure and completion,
regardless of emotional attachment or non-attachment, still would
produce the desired effect of creating desire for oneness if you truly
saw and understood the body and its acts as representative of truth. You
have thought the things you do represent your drives, but they simply
represent what was given to help you remember and return to who you
truly are.

<sup>5.8</sup> Obviously—as you have been told that the ego has
represented a false self—it is possible to misrepresent. But the new
world you have entered need not be filled with misrepresentations, for
you are cause and effect. It is through the representation of the true
that the false is exposed as nothing. A lie is nothing but a lie. The
false is nothing but the false. It does not become some “thing,” for in
the becoming it would need to take on the properties of the truth. Think
of the ego again as an example here. The ego but seemed to be who you
were for a time. Now that you know who you are in truth, the ego does
not remain, a separate entity with a life of its own. No. The ego is
gone. Because it was a lie its exposure to the truth dissolved it. 

<sup>5.9</sup> Thus must it be now with everything in your world.
Everywhere you look the lie of false representation will be exposed and
the truth will be represented once again. As was said earlier, this
seeing of the truth is the first step as it is the step necessary for
the restoration of divine design. True seeing facilitates the return to
what is and we but proceed from this starting point. 

<sup>5.10</sup> While you have learned to take judgment from your
seeing, this must be reemphasized now as you are called to see what you
might previously have thought of as inconsequential in the light of
truth. Everything *given* represents the truth. 

<sup>5.11</sup> Remember now that you are not called to reinterpret but
to accept revelation. You will not arrive at the truth through thinking
about what everything means. This is the old way that led to so much
misinterpretation and misrepresentation. Acceptance of what is given is
acceptance of what is given. All was *given* to you to remind you of who
you are in the time of learning that is now passing away. Thus all was
*given* to you to *represent* what is rather than to *be* what is. Now,
as you join with the truth, your representation, in the new time that is
before us, will *be* what is, in its representation. Simply put, this
means that form will never be all that you are, but will return to being
as it was intended and will represent the truth of who you are. This
true representation, being of the truth, returns you to the reality of
the truth where you exist in oneness. 

<sup>5.12</sup> Love and the loving patterns given in the time of
learning are all that exist in all you see. But what now will become of
these patterns that are no longer needed as your learning and that of
those around you comes to an end? What was created to serve the time of
learning, to represent what is and aid you in your return to what is,
will become what is once again. What you can see with your body’s eyes
will not be *all* that *is* but will represent all that is truly. 

<sup>5.13</sup> What was made of what was created in order to serve the
ego will cease to be, just as the ego has ceased to be. To outline and
define the differences between what was created and what was made would
be to create a tome of information, and this is not needed now. The
desire for such is a desire to think through once again the meaning of
everything and to have a tool to help you do so. This would assume that
you are still a learning being and have need of such help. You are no
longer a learning being and need not this assistance. 

<sup>5.14</sup> In this time of Christ, we are not called to recreate
the “tools” of learning but to allow all that was created to show the
way back to Self and God to be what it is in truth. This is the return
of love to love. This is acceptance of your Self. 

<sup>5.15</sup> What then is the call to creation that has been spoken
of? This is the acceptance of the *new* you—acceptance that you are
going beyond simple recognition and acceptance of the Self as God
created the Self—to the living of this Self in form. This is an
acceptance that recognizes that while the Self that God created is
eternal and the self of form as ancient as the sea and stars, the
elevated Self of form is new and will create a new world.

<sup>5.16</sup> This is the answer to the question of “What is next?” If
there is nothing to learn, if coursework is behind you and
accomplishment is complete, what then are you to do? You are to create
in community, in dialogue, in commitment and togetherness. You are to be
the living Covenant of the New. 

<sup>5.17</sup> But while this is what awaits you, I am merely answering
the questions that remain and that occur as this dialogue proceeds. What
I am attempting to answer now is your confusion concerning what *is*.
This is crucial as you learn to accept what *is* and to deny what is
*not*. While the question of what is *not* has been answered as fully as
is possible, your questions and my answers in regard to what *is* are
somewhat confusing to you, because what *is* is not a constant that can
be *answered*. That you want answers while I tell you to await
revelation speaks to the impatience of the human spirit, the longing
that has so long gone unfulfilled that now that you are close you cannot
bear to wait another day, another hour. You want release from your
prison *now*, and so you should. 

<sup>5.18</sup> Yet what you *think* imprisons you is also what I am
addressing here.  Release through death is no longer the answer. Release
through life is the answer. Release through resurrection is the answer.
You have died to the old. But surely it would seem easier in some ways
to have literally died and been released from the prison of the body,
the prison of the Earth and your immediate environment, the prison of
your mind and the thoughts that so confuse you, the prison of past and
future and a now that isn’t changing fast enough to suit the new *you*
whom you have become. 

<sup>5.19</sup> This is what we discuss today. We discuss being what you
represent in truth. We discuss the elevation of form. And what we have
discussed thus far is the acceptance of form as what it is. This is the
new reality you have desired. To live as who you are *in form*. To not
wait for death’s release but to find release while still living *in
form*. Thus we begin with the true content of the form you occupy. We
return the form you occupy to its natural state. Only then can we
proceed to creation of the new. Because Christ-consciousness is
consciousness of what is, we begin with what is, with creation as it was
created rather than as you have perceived it to be. From this starting
point only can we move forward to the future we create together. 

<sup>5.20</sup> What I’m revealing to you here is that what was once a
prison may no longer be a prison! If you continue to think of your body
as a prison, if you continue to think of your environment, your mind,
and time as a prison, how can it exist in perfect harmony with the
universe?  As you can see, you are now approaching another thought
reversal. Fear not that your confusion will last, for with this thought
reversal will come your final release. 

<sup>5.21</sup> You will soon wonder, if you haven’t already, just how
it is going to be possible to live as your new Self while still in form,
while still in a form that seems inconsistent with your being, while
still in a form that exists within a form, within a world that seems
inconsistent with your being. You will wonder how, if you are done
learning, the patterns of learning will change to help you embrace the
acceptance of this new time of no time. You will wonder how to live in
time as a being no longer bound by time. And I tell you truly, that once
acceptance of what is is complete, we will go on to these questions of
the new and together we will find the answers.

<sup>5.22</sup> So let today’s dialogue serve as a final call, a most
emphatic call, to acceptance. See the importance of this acceptance to
everything that is still to come. Hesitate no longer. Let your
willingness exceed your trepidation. No longer wait to be told more
before you accept what you have already been told. Do not wait for a
grander call before you accept the call that has already sounded in your
heart. Let this be the day of your final surrender, the day that will
usher in a new day.

