---
chapter: "16"
title: "Chapter 16: From Image to Presence"
---

<sup>16.1</sup> Barren forms might be seen as forms that existed before
the onset of the state of becoming. You are now in the final stage of
the state of becoming. You now know who you are, and so now you can
begin the work, or the relationship of this final stage: The stage of
becoming who you are. This is the stage in which movement, being, and
expression come together into the recreation of wholeness that will be
expressed in the elevated Self of form. 

<sup>16.2</sup> The creation story is occurring, right now, in each of
you who have reached this final stage of becoming. This is both the
beginning stage and the final stage, for once begun, the story of
creation moves inevitably to join with the accomplishment and wholeness
that already exist in unity. Creation occurs in each of us, seemingly
one at a time.  Creation is our coming into our true identity, and is
the extension or expression of that identity into the creation of
wholeness in form. 

<sup>16.3</sup> To be barren is to be empty. Empty is the opposite of
full, the opposite of wholeness. It is the perceived condition of lack.
It is the belief that what animated form with life did not remain. The
belief that in the passing through, a relationship did not form. But as
can be easily seen, the earth is no longer a formless wasteland. Form
was animated with spirit and entered a state of becoming. You were
animated with spirit and you too entered a state of becoming. 

<sup>16.4</sup> You can be an expression of being and yet not express
the wholeness of being. This is a description of the state of becoming.
It is a perceived state. It is a state in which the unified principles
of creation are seen to be taking place as separate steps. This is so
because of the condition of time. Once these principles are unified,
time will have ended just as time was once begun. 

<sup>16.5</sup> The unified principles of creation, once unified within
each of us, bring light to each of us; they bring the ability to see,
the ability to know, the ability to be, the ability to create. Through
the art of thought, these abilities become who we are. God and Creation
are synonymous, and you are reminded of that here as you and God become
synonymous through Creation. Means and end are one. Cause and effect the
same. Creation is means and end as God is means and end. Creation is
cause and effect as God is cause and effect. When you move from the
state of becoming to the state of being whole, you will have moved
through the act of creation and you will have become a creator. You will
be ready for creation of the new. 

<sup>16.6</sup> You were told within this Course that being *is* as love
*is*.  Here you are told that being is a principle of creation and you
are not told that love is a principle of creation. Love is not a
principle any more than it is an attribute. This is because love remains
in eternal wholeness. Love cannot be learned, and so has stood apart
from the time of learning. Being could be *learned* here, because it was
not yet whole.  Being is synonymous with identity. When your being and
your identity, your Self and your awareness of Self are whole and
complete, being, like love, is no longer capable of being learned, for
it no longer has attributes.  

<sup>16.7</sup> Love *is* the spirit of the wind that animates all form.
Love *is* spirit, *is* God, *is* creation. Love is a description of the
All of All because it is whole and rests in eternal completion and
wholeness.  Love *is* the state of unity, the only relationship through
which the Self and God become known to you. Love, God, Creation, are all
that remained in union, in eternal completion, when form came into
being. 

<sup>16.8</sup> Yet movement, being, and expression are also what *is*
because they are the givens. Love, like God, like Creation, is the giver
of the givens. Life was given through the extension and the expression
of God, of Love, of Creation—through the extension of wholeness—into the
seemingly separate identities of form. The way of that extension was the
way of the unified principles of creation, the way of movement, being,
and expression.

<sup>16.9</sup> The difference between the *way* that *is* and *what is*
lies in choice.  While you think that you can choose to stand apart from
God, apart from Love, apart from Creation, you cannot. But you *can*,
while existing in time and form, choose to stand apart from movement,
being, and expression. You can choose, in other words, to exist without
allowing spirit to move you, without allowing yourself to be who you
are, without allowing for self-expression. You might think that you can
*be* simply because you exist and that as long as you exist in form you
are *being* because you are being something. You are alive. You have
form. You think and feel. You have even been told that you would cease
to *be* without the existence of spirit, and so, you think, you must at
least *be*. You are, after all, called a human *being*. 

<sup>16.10</sup> While you are becoming you are still being acted upon
by creation.  You are still being acted upon by creation because you are
not yet whole. When you are whole, creation’s principles will be what
you do and what you are rather than what is happening to you. Creation’s
purpose, creation’s cause and effect is wholeness and the continuing
expression of wholeness. While it was said in “A Treatise on the New”,
that “Now is the time to move out of the time of becoming who you are to
the time of being who you are,” it was not said that this time of
becoming was completed. 

<sup>16.11</sup> And yet giving and receiving are one in truth. All of
the principles of creation are in accord with this truth, and thus these
truths occur in unison or in union. Becoming *is* movement. Movement is
given and becomes movement in form. Being is given and becomes being in
form. Expression is given and becomes expression in form. Since you were
conceived in form, you were in movement. Since you were conceived in
form, you were being. Since you were conceived in form, you were
expressing. It would be impossible for these principles of creation not
to be constantly occurring in everything that lives because all that
lives, lives because of creation’s continuing creation. 

<sup>16.12</sup> Becoming is the movement from image to presence. It is
upon you as we speak. It is not a learned state or process and it should
not be seen as a cause for disappointment. Perhaps you thought you were
beyond this point of becoming. And yet, as you have begun your practice
of awareness, acceptance, and discovery, you have felt as if you still
have a long way to go. You have often thought that even though you may
be done with learning, you don’t feel quite complete, or possibly even
feel as if learning has not quite been accomplished accomplished in you.
This is precisely why we now discuss this state of becoming, this
movement from image to presence. 

<sup>16.13</sup> There is creation going on in this becoming, the very
creation promised you.  This is the creation of the new *you* that you
were told will precede the creation of the new world. This is what is
meant by “as within, so without.” Only a new *you* can create a new
world. The new *you* is the elevated Self of form who you are in the
process of becoming.  This time of becoming is the time in between your
awareness of and access to Christ-consciousness or unity, and your
sustainability of Christ-consciousness or unity, in form. In your time
of directly experiencing the movement, being, and expression of unity,
you are being who you are. At other times, you are becoming who you are. 

<sup>16.14</sup> In your time of directly experiencing the movement,
being, and expression of unity, you are whole and complete, you feel no
lack, no uncertainty, no doubt. You are confident in what you know. You
realize fully that you are no longer a learning being and that you have
no need for teachers or for guidance other than for that which comes
from your own heart.

<sup>16.15</sup> At times when you are not directly experiencing the
movement, being, and expression of unity, you realize the state of
becoming. To realize the state of becoming is to realize that an
in-between exists between the time of learning and the time of being the
elevated Self of form; that times still exist in which you are not
wholly present as who you are. 

<sup>16.16</sup> When you are not wholly present as who you are, you are
experiencing, still, the image or after-image of who you are. This image
is like a lingering shadow. It encompasses all of your former ideas
about yourself, all of the patterns of the time of learning, all of the
moments in which you feel an inability to join in union, and in which
you recognize still the image of your former self. 

<sup>16.17</sup> This is only an image. This is not your personal self,
your ego self, or your separated self, come to reclaim you. This is why
we have also described this as an after-image. This is but a photograph
that remains, a copy of what you once might have thought of as your
“original” self. It is but an impression, as in clay, or a reflection,
as in a mirror. It is as removed from who you are as is the picture of
an ancestor or a landscape that hangs on your wall separate from what it
is an image of. 

<sup>16.18</sup> There may be striking beauty in this image, as there is
in art of all kinds.  This may be an idealized image of your former
self, the image of your *best* self, who you may imagine now, through
the grace of God, you finally are. But this may also at times be an
image of a type, a construction of the subconscious, which still sees in
forms and symbols.  This kind of image may leave you thinking that you
are “acting” as if you have changed, while even within your new actions
you see archetypes of the previously known and previously experienced. 

<sup>16.19</sup> The stimulus for these after-images is gone. They are
but sensations that remain, like memories of childhood. This time of
becoming is a time of coming to acceptance of them as what they
are—images. This time of becoming is a time of coming to acceptance that
they are not real. They are no more real than the mirage of your future,
another aspect of the image you have held of yourself. They are no more
real than was your image of heaven, or any image you have had of heaven
on earth, paradise found.

<sup>16.20</sup> The time of becoming is a time of letting these images
be without reacting to them. It is a time of coming to no longer “hold”
these images in your mind and heart. It is a time of letting them first
cease to affect you, and then of letting them go entirely, for without
letting them go you are not fully present. Without letting them go, your
presence is not wholly realized, you are not fully here, not whole, not
complete. You are *at times* who you are, but you also are, at times,
but an image of who you have perceived yourself to be. 

<sup>16.21</sup> This image, being but an image, is incapable of true
joining in relationship. You must be fully present in order to join in
relationship. All of your images are false images, and when you retain
them you do not allow for the time of learning to be replaced with the
only replacement that will sustain Christ-consciousness, the replacement
of learning with sharing in unity and relationship.

