---
chapter: "17"
title: "Chapter 17: The Secret of Succession"
---

<sup>17.1</sup> To succeed is to follow after, and to follow into
inheritance. It is a following after that occurs in time and space
rather than in truth.  It is never about one. It is not about
replacement. It comes in a never ending series rather than in singular
form. It is not true succession if there is a break in the chain or in
the line of succession for true succession does not stop and start, but
is continual. 

<sup>17.2</sup> The series build to a climax, to what, during the time
of evolution, might have been called evolutionary leaps. 

<sup>17.3</sup> The secret of succession is simple.  It is but a matter
of wholehearted desire. Do you wholeheartedly desire to follow me to
your true inheritance? To come after me and be as I was?  To be the
inheritor of the gifts that are ours? Do you desire this? Are you
willing to claim it? Are you willing to claim it in form and time?

<sup>17.4</sup> Can you understand that what you claim in form and time
was always yours? 

<sup>17.5</sup> Little can be had without desire. Desire, unlike want,
asks for a response rather than a provision. Desire is a longing for, a
stretching out for. Imagine yourself at the summit of this mountain we
have climbed, standing with arms raised, hands wide open, gazing
jubilantly into the heavens rather than toward the earth below. This is
the stance of both desire and fulfillment. Of longing and attainment. Of
having asked and having received. Of having striven mightily and
succeeded. It is what comes after the embrace of homecoming, and what
comes before the passing of desire and the reverence that replaces it.
It acknowledges a certain “taking over” of the spirit of desire. Having
“arrived,” the desire to “get there” has not been satiated but only has
grown into something different. With having arrived comes the “presence”
of Self so long awaited, the joy of accomplishment, the taste of
victory. 

<sup>17.6</sup> But the desire, the desire is stronger than ever before.
The influx of attainment has begun. The height of achievement has been
reached. Your glory is realized. But the desire, the desire is stronger
than ever before. 

<sup>17.7</sup> You are not alone in your glory or achievement and you
marvel that this takes nothing from your feeling of accomplishment.  You
want to share it with the whole world. From the top of the mountain,
arms outstretched, this desire too has caused your arms to raise as if
of their own accord. You feel the power of giving and receiving as one,
for this is what this gesture symbolizes, a great and steady flow of
giving and receiving as one, an unbroken chain of giving and receiving
as one.  You offer up your glory and call it down from heaven, both at
the same time. 

<sup>17.8</sup> But the desire, the desire is stronger than ever before. 

<sup>17.9</sup> You know instinctively that this desire is not a desire
to hold on to what you have. That this moment of achievement and glory
is a gift of this moment, a gift of presence. Your gesture, so like unto
that of a champion who has crossed a finish line and won a race, is not
meant to remain as it is in this moment. It is not a trophy for your
wall. It is not an achievement you would hope to best. It simply is what
it is: A moment of presence full of both desire and fulfillment. 

<sup>17.10</sup> Hope, as was said within this Course, is a condition of
the initiate. You have now passed hope by as you have moved beyond the
state of initiation. You are no longer hopeful for what will come. Hope
is desire accompanied by expectation. To expect is to await, and you are
no longer waiting. You have arrived. You have passed through the stage
of initiation. You have reached the top of the mountain. 

<sup>17.11</sup> You stand now at the threshold.  The stimulus has been
provided, the journey taken. You are present. Now is the time for your
response. 

<sup>17.12</sup> That response is wholehearted desire, which is the
power that *A Course of Love* came to return to you.  You were told
within this Course that wholehearted desire for union would return union
to you and return you to your Self. This is the moment of realization of
that accomplishment. But your desire has not left you. Your desire is
stronger than ever before. 

<sup>17.13</sup> What is different now is that your wholeheartedness, as
well as your desire, has moved beyond the pattern of thought. 

<sup>17.14</sup> Let me return you to the questions that were asked of
you earlier, for they are even more pertinent now. Do you think desire
will still be with you when you have achieved what you have desired? Is
it not possible to conceive of a time in which desire will no longer
serve you, just as learning now no longer serves you? If you reach a
state of full acceptance of who you are, and in that state, fully accept
that your contribution is being made, will desire still be with you? 

<sup>17.15</sup> Your heart is a full well. It is because you have now
turned to your heart, instead of to your thinking, that you feel both
fulfillment and desire. But my earlier questions seemed to indicate that
once fulfillment was reached, desire would no longer be with you. But
your desire is still with you. It is stronger than ever before. 

<sup>17.16</sup> The only reason why this might be so is that it is
meant to be so.  Something is still desired. 

<sup>17.17</sup> Desire asks for a response.  Earlier it was said that
desire asks for a response while want asks for provision. What is the
difference we speak of here? 

<sup>17.18</sup> Provision is about preparation for future needs. This
is an appropriate response to want, but it is an inappropriate response
to desire. It is an assumption of needs unfulfilled. You now stand in
fulfillment. This is the secret of succession. 

<sup>17.19</sup> Desire asks for a response. From where is this response
sought?  You now must understand the fullness of the well of your heart,
the interrelationship of desire and fulfillment. The interrelationship
of desire and fulfillment is what occurs at the threshold. Beyond the
threshold is the state in which desire has passed and been replaced by
reverence. To revere is to feel awe, which, it has been stated, is due
nothing and no one but God. To move beyond desire to reverence is to
move into the state of communion with God, full oneness with God,
wholeness. 

<sup>17.20</sup> You have realized now that you remain in a state of
becoming, and any disappointment you may have initially felt with this
realization has been replaced by acceptance.  Acceptance has come
because you recognize the signs of becoming that we have been
discussing. You recognize them because they are what you are feeling.
You may wonder still, however, how you can be told that you have arrived
and are at your journey’s end and yet still have farther to go. 

<sup>17.21</sup> You have nowhere to go. The journey is over. You stand
at the threshold, the gateway to the site you have traveled so far to
reach.  You are here and desire fills you, even while you know the glory
of having arrived. 

<sup>17.22</sup> But having arrived here, it is as if a new question is
asked of you. Just as in the myths that are as ageless as they are
timeless, you are asked for something here. You are asked for a
response. 

<sup>17.23</sup> Only in myth is this a response to a specific question,
but even the specific questions of myth, when seen truly, were questions
of the heart, calling only for a response from the heart. 

<sup>17.24</sup> Desire calls here, louder and stronger than ever
before, because of your proximity to what you have desired. Every hero’s
journey returns him home. To where he started from. In story form, this
takes place with movement. Years are spent traveling many paths and many
miles. All the heartaches are experienced along the way. All the
experiences and learning occur on the journey. 

<sup>17.25</sup> This is why you have been told the time of parables, or
stories, has ended. This is why you have been told: “As within, so
without.” This is why you have been taken to the top of the mountain
without leaving home. You have taken the inward course, the inward
journey, the only journey that is real in the only way that is real. 

<sup>17.26</sup> We will spend forty days and forty nights here
together, at the top of the mountain, fasting from want, becoming aware
of desire, responding to desire. This is the final stage of becoming.
Herein lies the secret of succession.

