---
chapter: "7"
title: "Chapter 7: Time and the Experience of Transformation"
---

<sup>7.1</sup> Just as when you were a being existing in the shared
consciousness of unity you couldn’t know what the experience of form
would be like without entering into it, you cannot know the experience
of unity without entering into it. To “enter” into the experience of
form is something you can picture in your mind, and that you have
language to represent, because you are aware of the self of form. To
“enter” into the experience of unity is something more difficult to
imagine, and something for which you have little language. 

<sup>7.2</sup> You were told within this Course that what you learn in
unity is shared. This language was used because you were still, at that
time, a learning being. Now we will adjust our language somewhat to
represent the new and restate what was said earlier as “What you
*discover* in unity is shared.” Learning does not occur in unity, but
discovery is an ongoing aspect of creation and thus of the state of
union in which you truly abide. 

<sup>7.3</sup> You were also told within this Course that because you
were learning in separation, unity had to be experienced individually
before learning could be shared at another level, and that levels are a
function of time. We then talked of the integration of levels that
collapse time.  This integration of levels is the integration of form
and unity. When Christ-consciousness is sustained, time will collapse
and the sun may not need to rise or set to separate day into night.
Resting and waking will be part of the same continuum of being. 

<sup>7.4</sup> Experiences of form take place in time because
experience, too, was designed for learning. Now experience is needed in
time to aid your total acceptance of what you have learned. In order to
experience the new you must answer the call to let revelation and
discovery, rather than learning, be what you gain from experience.

<sup>7.5</sup> What was created cannot be uncreated. Thus transformation
is needed.  The miracle makes you fully aware of the embrace and the
consciousness of unity and places you outside of time. In this state, no
duality exists. Doing and being are one. 

<sup>7.6</sup> Action is the bridge between form and the formless
because action is the expression of the self in form.  “Right” action
comes from the unity in which doing and being are one, or in other words
from the state in which there is no division between who you are and
what you do. “Right” action comes from the state of wholeness. Being
whole is being all you are. Being all you are is what the elevated Self
of form represents. 

<sup>7.7</sup> You have been told that you are time-bound only as a
particular self, existing as man or woman in a particular time in
history. Now you are called to discover how to exist in form without
being defined by this time-bound particularity. 

<sup>7.8</sup> That you are living form does not require you to be
defined by particularity. You can accept the body now as what it is in
all its manifestations while not seeing it as “bound” by the
particularity of time and space. It may still exist in a particular time
and place, but this is simply the nature of one aspect of what you are.
The nature of form is that it exists as matter, it occupies space and is
perceptible to the senses. You have previously seen this one aspect of
form as separating it from mind, heart, and spirit—those aspects that
are not perceptible to the senses. But let me repeat that all that lives
is from the same Source, and there is nothing more alive than mind and
heart combined in the spirit of wholeheartedness. 

<sup>7.9</sup> Matter is simply another word for content, and need not
be maligned.  The content of all living things is the energy of the
spirit of wholeheartedness. The content of all living things is, in
other words, whole. By seeing only aspects of wholeness you have not
seen content nor matter truly. You have not been aware of all that you
are. You are thus now called to discover and to become aware of all that
you are. The body, rather than aiding you in learning as it once did,
will aid you now in this discovery. 

<sup>7.10</sup> Realize that this is a call to love all of yourself. You
who once could love spirit *or* mind, mind *or* body—because of the
dualistic nature associated with them—now can love all of your Self, all
of God, all of creation.  You can respond to love with love. 

<sup>7.11</sup> But again, we start with the body, returning love to it
now. It is what it is, and nothing that it is, is deserving of anything
other than love. This call to love all of your Self is a call to
unconditional, nonjudgmental love. It is not just a call to
nonjudgmentalness, but to nonjudgmental love. This nonjudgmental love is
the condition upon which your discovery of all you do not yet know
awaits. 

<sup>7.12</sup> Discovery is not the same as remembrance.  Remembrance
was necessary for your return to your true identity, the Self as it was
created. Remembrance was not about what you did not know, but about what
you knew but had forgotten. Memory has returned you to your Self.
Discovery will allow the new you to come into being by revealing what
you do not yet know about how to live as the elevated Self of form. 

<sup>7.13</sup> This discovery can only take place in the reality of
love. 

<sup>7.14</sup> Being in love is a definition of what you now are as you
accept the unconditional, nonjudgmental love of all. This is a
transference of love from the particular to the universal. Loving all
that you are, including your body, is not love of the particular but
universal love. The old way in which you related to your body, be it a
love or a hate relationship, was a particular relationship with the
vessel that only seemed to contain you. It was a relationship with the
separated self. Now, because your relationship is with wholeness, you
can transfer love from the particular to the universal by loving all. We
are one body, one Christ. 

<sup>7.15</sup> The observation, envisioning, and desire you have been
practicing in order to be ready to accept revelation works hand in hand
with the new pattern of discovery, but discovery is less time bound. Let
me explain. 

<sup>7.16</sup> Observation takes place in time. Even while you have
been called to observe what *is*, what you are observing in form are the
representations of what *is* in time. Your envisioning too is bound to
time and that is why so many of you think of envisioning as envisioning
the future.  Envisioning is less bound to time than is observation
because it is not about what your body’s eyes see, and will increasingly
join with what you observe until your vision is released from old
patterns and guides you more truly. 

<sup>7.17</sup> Desire is an acknowledgment of the uniqueness of each
Self, and is a demonstration of means and end being the same. Desire
keeps you focused on your own path and leaves you nonjudgmental of the
paths of others. Yet desire, like observation and vision, is still
related to the self of form. It is a step toward full acceptance and
awareness of who you are now and what this means as you become the
elevated Self of form. 

<sup>7.18</sup> Revelation is of God. Observation, vision, and desire
are steps leading you beyond what the individual, separated self sees,
to the revelation of what is. These steps that lead to revelation are
not ongoing aspects of creation, because they are related to particular
forms as they exist in time. Time is not an aspect of eternity or of
unity. Time is thus what has separated the self that exists in form from
the Self that exists in union or the state of Christ-consciousness. By
becoming one body, one Christ, you have accepted existence as a
non-particular being in a state outside of time—you have accepted
existence as a new Self, the Self of elevated form. You just do not yet
understand what this means.

<sup>7.19</sup> Discovery is not bound by time as it is an ongoing
aspect of creation. As you were told in “A Treatise on the New”, the
future is yet to be created. While this seems like a time-bound
statement, it is not.  It is merely one way of stating that creation is
ongoing rather than static. That while creation *is* and *is* as it was
created, it was created to be eternally expanding and expressing in new
ways. 

<sup>7.20</sup> With your new awareness *you* are now linked, through
the consciousness of unity, with the entire field of creation, rather
than only with the time-bound field of creation of form. As your
awareness grows, you will begin to expand and express in new ways. Those
ways thus now include the form of your body without being limited to
creation of, and in, form. The body has thus joined creation in a
non-time-bound way. 

<sup>7.21</sup> Evolution is the time-bound way in which the body has
participated in creation. This is why you have been told that you are
not called to evolution. Time-bound evolution is the way of the
creature, the natural response of the living organism to the stimulus of
matter upon matter, and of the creature’s perception of its own
experience in time. This time-bound evolution is really adaptation. It
occurs in reaction to what is perceived as necessary for survival. 

<sup>7.22</sup> Time-bound evolution is still surely going on, and as
the planet becomes crowded, as progress has left so many unfulfilled, as
environmental concerns mount, even the perceived survival needs are
leading you toward new answers of what survival may mean. 

<sup>7.23</sup> Everyone knows, in this time of Christ, that the end of
the old way is near and that the new is coming. They are thus moving
toward anticipation rather than adaptation, and evolution moves with
them. But evolution in time is part of the old that needs to be left
behind. It is a provision of the time of learning that allows the
learning being to learn at his or her own pace and to pass this learning
on in time.

<sup>7.24</sup> Everyone knows that this has not worked to improve the
fate of man.  Everyone secretly fears that evolution will not keep pace
with the changing world and that man’s reign over his environment will
come to an abrupt and painful end. Some even fear an evolutionary
setback, and see any threat against civilization as they know it as a
return to barbaric times.  

<sup>7.25</sup> These scenarios of fear we leave behind as we abandon
ideas of evolution in time and proceed to an awareness of how the
elevated Self of form can replace the laws of evolution in time with the
laws of transformation outside of time. 

<sup>7.26</sup> In order to facilitate your understanding, I call you
now to imagine your body as a dot in the center of a circle and the
circle as representing all that you are. The dot of your body is all
that is bound by time. What transformation outside of time asks you to
do is to see the body as but this one, small, aspect of what you are. In
observing both yourself and others, you have learned to view your body
in the field of time. This will be helpful now as you begin to imagine
the “more” that you are, the “more” that exists beyond the body’s
boundary and beyond the boundary of time and particularity. 

<sup>7.27</sup> This circle in which you have placed your body is not a
circle of time and space. It is not a circle that can be drawn around
where you exist so as to define, perhaps, a mile of space and say that
this is all you. No, the circle that exists around you is the circle of
shared consciousness, the circle of unity. In truth, this circle is
everything, the All of All, the universe, God. But just as the Earth can
be seen as your home, although you are rarely consciously aware of
existing in this “larger” home, you will not always be aware of this
circle of the Self as the All of Everything, and it will, in fact, be
helpful as we begin, to imagine on a smaller scale. 

<sup>7.28</sup> You might begin by imagining first your actual,
physical, home, then your neighborhood, community, city, state, country.
You see yourself as most your “self” in your home, your neighborhood,
your community. You identify with the citizens of the city, state, and
country you occupy.  You have an address, perhaps a yard, or farm,
perhaps a public spot that has become a favorite park or lake or beach
that you consider partially yours. You have a route to and from your
work or other places that you go, where you see familiar landmarks,
structures, faces. You visit the homes of friends and relatives, your
church, perhaps a school or library, certain restaurants or places of
civic duty or social engagement. You may expand this small territory you
call your own with business travel or vacations, and have more than one
locale that feels like home; or you may never travel far from the
building in which you dwell. What I ask you to do is to think of these
areas as the territory of your body, and to remember that while this is
your territory, it is a shared territory and a territory within the
territory of planet Earth.

<sup>7.29</sup> Thus we will begin once again with parameters, with a
territory of shared consciousness, rather than with consciousness of the
All of Everything. This territory we will call the territory of your
conscious awareness. This territory of conscious awareness is shared
with the larger consciousness of unity, just as the territory of your
body is shared with those who live and work nearby. This territory of
conscious awareness exists within the larger consciousness of unity,
just as the territory of your body exists within the larger territory of
the planet Earth. We will begin here, with the territory of your
conscious awareness, knowing that discovery and revelation will expand
this territory, and realizing that no matter how small this cosmic
territory may be, it will still at times give way to awareness of the
All of Everything.

