---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "7"
title: "Day 7: Conditions of the Time of Acceptance"
---

<sup>7.1</sup> What does the idea of only now coming to acceptance imply
but that you were previously unaccepting? And what does being
unaccepting imply but the very denial of yourself that you have come to
see as your former state? 

<sup>7.2</sup> Denial of yourself was the precondition that set the
stage for the time of learning. The time of learning would not have been
needed had you not denied your Self. When you saw yourself as separate
and alone, you could not help but suffer fear, loneliness, and all the
ills that came from the base emotion of fear. Fear is degenerating.
Nothing about fear is life giving. You thus were given life only to have
it become degenerated by fear. 

<sup>7.3</sup> Acceptance of your Self is the precondition for the
*time* of acceptance. You are no longer denying your Self. You are no
longer denying unity. You have replaced fear with love.  Love is life
giving and life *supporting*. There is thus nothing now degenerating
about life. 

<sup>7.4</sup> Life is now supported. Support is thus a condition of the
time of acceptance. 

<sup>7.5</sup> You must realize here that the pattern of learning is now
all that is left that can be degenerating to you. While you always were
supported, the *idea* of learning that you accepted during the *time* of
learning was not one of support but one of effort. You must accept, now,
that the pattern of learning is an extension of fear and be willing and
vigilant in replacing it with a pattern of acceptance. I say this
because so many of you still do not feel supported in your daily life.
You may feel supported in your spiritual life, in your progress toward
full awareness and the elevation of the self of form, but as in the
discussion of abundance, you may still feel unsupported in form. Realize
now, that this makes no sense when our goal is the elevation of form. If
for no other reason, begin to accept this support of form because it
makes sense. It is logical. And realize further that love is not opposed
to logic but returns true reason to the mind and heart. 

<sup>7.6</sup> Love replaces fear and is life-generating rather than
life-degenerating. Your bodies will thus regenerate rather than
degenerate. Love is, of course, not a condition, as it is not an
attribute, but the *effect* of living from love rather than from fear
will have a major transformative effect on form in this time of
acceptance.  Regeneration is a condition of the time of acceptance. 

<sup>7.7</sup> Another condition of the time of acceptance that will be
of great service to you now is that of the different relationship that
you will have with time. This is a time of convergence, intersection,
and pass-through of the finite and the infinite, of time and no time.
Time has not yet ceased to be, but as you are in a state of
transformation, so too is it. Again I remind you, *as within, so
without*. As you let go of time’s hold on you, it will let go of you.
Time will seem to expand but will actually be contracting into
nothingness. Time is replaced by presence, by your ability to exist in
the here and now in acceptance and without fear. 

<sup>7.8</sup> Again let me remind you that you are in an in-between
time. Thus these conditions I have spoken of and those I have yet to
speak of, are also in an in-between state. They exist along with the new
you. They exist in acceptance and union. They do not exist in learning
and separation. They exist in love. They do not exist in fear. As with
Christ-consciousness, you are moving from a place of maintenance of
these conditions to one of sustainability of these conditions. They do
not come about from changes in your external circumstances but from
changes in your internal perspective. 

<sup>7.9</sup> The conditions that affect life are conditions that
affect the body.  Yet it was only your mind’s acceptance of the
condition of fear that led the body to exhibit the conditions of fear in
the time of learning. Thus it is the mind’s acceptance of love that will
lead the body to exhibit the effects of love in the time of acceptance. 

<sup>7.10</sup> A further condition of the time of acceptance is that of
expansion.  The singular self you once believed yourself to be was not
capable of true expansion and true sharing. The singular self withdrew
into its own little world and created its own universe. The elevated
Self of form will expand into the world and create a new universe. This
condition of expansion is operative now and beginning to find
manifestation through the sharing we are doing here. 

<sup>7.11</sup> Conditions of the time of acceptance are conditions of
creation and include those we have already spoken of as movement, being,
and expression; and convergence, intersection and pass-through.

<sup>7.12</sup> There are many lesser conditions that are nonetheless
extremely transformative, such as the replacement of special
relationship with the devotion of holy relationship that we have already
spoken of. Another replacement is that of control with grace. This
occurs as you give up the control you have but thought you exerted over
your life and its circumstances, and live in a state of grace, meeting
grace with grace by accepting what is given for your regeneration. 

<sup>7.13</sup> It is easy to see from here how the dominoes fall and
each condition of learning is replaced, always by a far gentler and more
compassionate alternative.  Thus there is no need for me to list every
new condition here. As you become increasingly aware of your
relationship with union, each of these new conditions and your
relationship with each of these new conditions will become clear to you. 

<sup>7.14</sup> Obviously your relationship or access to union is of
supreme importance, since all else will come of this.  However, this is
not an “if this, then that” situation even if it may seem so. Is the
process of breathing an “if this, then that” situation, just because
breathing sustains life? Your access to union sustains real life, the
life of the Self, and will come to sustain the elevated Self of form in
a way as natural to you as breathing. 

<sup>7.15</sup> *Access to unity* is a phrase that will only be used in
this in-between time. You have always existed in unity and once this is
fully realized you will no more need access to unity than you need
access to breathing. Unity will be your natural state. 

<sup>7.16</sup> When your natural state is fully returned to you and
sustained within Christ-consciousness, the conditions of the time of
acceptance, like the conditions of the time of learning, will pass.
There are no conditions in the state of union as there are no attributes
to love.  The natural created Self is all that is. Reverence prevails.

<sup>7.17</sup> There will be, however, a new stage following the time
of acceptance in which the elevated Self of form will be created and
come into full manifestation. 

<sup>7.18</sup> And yet what we are concerned about now is the present.
It is here, in this present and given time on the mountain that you must
realize that the conditions of the time of acceptance, like the
conditions of the time of learning, arise from within. Life has always
existed within the conditions of the time of acceptance. The conditions
of the time of learning were but imposed conditions that also arose from
within. 

<sup>7.19</sup> The conditions of the time of acceptance that we have
spoken of are thus not new conditions. They are conditions natural to
your Self, to a mind and heart joined in union. It was the disjoining of
mind and heart, of the real Self from the ego-self, that created the
need for learning and the imposition, from *within*, of the conditions
of the time of learning. 

<sup>7.20</sup> The condition of the time of acceptance that will most
clearly reveal to you your status in regard to maintaining or sustaining
your access to union will be that of the replacement of doubt with
certainty.  Certainty is a condition of the present. Realize you may say
you are certain of the future or the past but that you cannot make it
so. Thus your ability to maintain and then sustain your access to union
and thus your certainty, goes hand-in-hand with your ability to live in
the present. This ability is also contingent upon your recognition of
what certainty really is. 

<sup>7.21</sup> There is an acceptance of the present that some of you
are finding difficult and a false sense of certainty that some of you
may be experiencing. Thus these will be the subject of our next
dialogue.

