---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "3"
title: "Day 3: Accept Abundance"
---

<sup>3.1</sup> Accept your anger for it is the next step in the
continuum upon which we travel. When a person is dying, just as when a
person is undergoing this final surrender, there are stages through
which one moves. The first is denial, the second is anger. We have
already spoken of denial, albeit in a new way. Now we will speak of
anger, in both an old and a new way. Let me suggest to you what it is
truly all about. It is about the way you have learned and your lack of
understanding of what this did to you. 

<sup>3.2</sup> What was it that was “taught” to in the time of learning?
It was the mind. Thus, your mind has been trained for learning and you
are most willing to have new insight, new information, and even new
discoveries, enter through your mind—because this is known to you and is
what you are familiar with. In the area of the mind were you most
willing to accept teachers, leaders, guides, authorities, for only
*through* them did you learn. You are beginning to see now that this
learning was not a choice but only the way you knew life to be. While
the freedom of childhood learning might be seen as the way learning was
meant to be, the time of this pure learning has grown shorter and
shorter while the time of enforced learning has grown more entrenched.

<sup>3.3</sup> In the area of the body came another form of learning
about which you saw yourself as having little choice. When the body had
something to teach you, what choice did you have but to listen? So the
mind and body were both conditioned to have learning thrust upon them.
You long ago quit resisting most of this learning and “accepted” it as
the way things are. This kind of acceptance is what we are reversing
with a new acceptance. 

<sup>3.4</sup> With your heart you grew less accepting of these
“outside” attempts at influence. You, who as both individuals and as a
species, have been conditioned by thousands of years of learning through
the mind—learning in often painful ways—said “no” to learning through
the heart. Many of you will admit to growing a bit angry with the
beginning of this Course and its challenge to your ideas regarding love.
Most of you approached learning through the heart with even more
openness than you did new ideas about love, not realizing that they were
one and the same. 

<sup>3.5</sup> So our first point of discussion in the realm of anger is
that no matter where anger seems to arise, anger is a product of the
condition of learning. It always was, but now this is being revealed to
you not just through my words, but by your experiencing of anger in new
ways.  You may not have felt a great deal of this anger yet, but it is
there, and here we will discuss its function. 

<sup>3.6</sup> There is one area that is greeted with even more anger
and more resistance in regard to learning of all kinds—in other words
both old learning as well as new—than love. This is the area that you
call money and that I call abundance. Feel your body’s reaction to this
statement.  Some of you will feel excitement at the idea of this issue
being finally discussed; but be aware of your feelings as we proceed,
for I tell you truly, here is where your greatest anger, and your
greatest lack of belief and acceptance, lies.  

<sup>3.7</sup> You may believe a spiritual context for your life can
change your life, make you feel more peaceful, give you comfort of a
non-physical nature. These ideas, whether you realize it or not, are all
associated with mind. It is through your mind that these new ideas will
change your actions and your life, your mind that, through increased
stillness, will give you more peace, your mind that will accept comfort
of a certain type, even extending to a new comfortableness of being. You
believe having a spiritual context for your life can, in other words,
change your inner life, but are more skeptical in regard to its ability
to affect your outer life; and nowhere are you more skeptical than in
regard to money or abundance. The area of money, or abundance, is where
learning fooled you and failed you the most. 

<sup>3.8</sup> You may believe that having a spiritual context for your
life will assist you in feeling more loved and possibly even assist you
in finding some one to love. You may believe that this spirituality can
help mend a feeling of broken-heartedness, can cause you to extend
forgiveness to those who hurt you, to make amends to those you hurt, or
to simply quit feeling guilty or bitter, shamed or rejected because of
them. But you do not believe this spiritual context is capable of
bringing you the lack of want you associate most strongly with money. 

<sup>3.9</sup> Just posing the idea that having a spiritual context for
your life will assist you in living abundantly will cause you to think,
“I doubt it.” Or, “I’ll believe it when I see it.” You might think
spirituality can assist you in living a more simple life and thus a life
of limits of which you are more accepting. But given time to consider
such an idea, you are likely to become more and more agitated, to go
back and forth between the general and specific, thinking of both your
own lack in life and that of those whose lack is more pronounced than
your own. Fairness seems non-existent in terms of who “has” and who “has
not,” and the world seems made up of haves and have nots and to function
in the insane way that it does largely due to this discrepancy. 

<sup>3.10</sup> In such a case, would it make sense that we not address
this issue, this blatant cause of so much insanity?  This cause of such
anger? 

<sup>3.11</sup> Let us return for a minute to the base idea behind the
issue of money or abundance: the way you have learned.  The mind would
tell you that nothing is “given,” and that all must be either learned or
earned, most times both, for you have learned in order to earn, learned
in order to advance yourself in the world in one way or another. Since
money or abundance is not a “given” for all, but only for a few, you
think of it much like the “given” of natural gifts or talents, the
“givens” of fresh and inspired ideas. You do not, however, see that
these are in truth linked as givens, for you do not see that all are
gifted. 

<sup>3.12</sup> It is only because some are gifted more abundantly than
others that they can use the givens of talent and inspired ideas to
bring them wealth. This is the idea of bartering, which we have spoken
of before, or bargaining, which we will speak more of here. It is the
base idea that is behind all ideas of lack, an idea you so thoroughly
learned during the time of learning that letting it go, even now, still
torments you with worry and anger. It is the idea of an “if this, then
that” world. An idea of a world in which the beliefs set forth within
this Course are neither seen nor lived by.  

<sup>3.13</sup> This is the basic fallacy that the time of learning
supported. The idea of “if this, then that.” The idea of abundance
earned. The idea of nothing being truly free. Not you, and not your
gifts. Everything coming with a price.  Abundance comes, even to those
gifted, only through the exploitation of gifts. Abundance remains, even
to those born with it, only through the exploitation of others. Only
through some having less do some have more.

<sup>3.14</sup> To think in such terms, and then to see such thoughts as
even capable of having spiritual value, is something you think of as
insane.  There seems no remedy, and so you would rather not even attempt
an understanding of how things might be different. As far as you have
come, these ideas are still with most of you to one degree or another.
Even though you know these are false ideas, and in that knowing may even
say to yourself as you read them that you no longer think in such a way,
they are there in the learned pattern and you know this too. They are
what prevent you from believing that the ideas set forth in this Course,
when practiced, are capable of making a difference, especially in terms
of monetary abundance. This is one of those situations in which you know
and have no idea what to do with what you know. Being unable to replace,
in application, the false with the true, the pattern of the false
remains. 

<sup>3.15</sup> Yet how can you accept yourself when you have feelings
such as these? How can you accept the idea of inheritance with ideas
such as these? How do you accept me when you see me as symbolizing a
life of “godly” poverty, and of calling my followers to abandon their
worldly goods? 

<sup>3.16</sup> Thus must this source of your anger and discontent, this
source of your non-acceptance, be revealed in a new light. 

<sup>3.17</sup> Let’s go back to the idea of money when it is seen as a
“given.” It is seen as a “given” in one case only: In the case of
inheritance, in the case of those “born” to money. Thus this is a good
place to start, since inheritance is that of which we speak. Let’s be
clear that we are not speaking of money or abundance as being “given”
when it is hard work to attain. Not even when it seems to come from some
event of luck or fate.  We are talking specifically here of the money
“given” through inheritance, the money some lucky ones are born with. 

<sup>3.18</sup> These are those who are resented most within your world.
And yet envied. This resentment and envy fills you with anger. If you
feel any anger now, pay attention to its effect on you. You can feel,
perhaps, the strain and tension in your stomach, back and neck. 

<sup>3.19</sup> The degree of your discomfort with this issue is
something you only imagine to be greater than that of your brothers and
sisters. A few of you will not feel this, and if you are among those
few, do not skip past this dialogue, but join in so that you understand,
as do those for whom this dialogue is meant, the power of this aspect of
your brothers’ and sisters’ lives, and the power and function of anger. 

<sup>3.20</sup> The power of money to affect you is a power that is
denied, rarely acknowledged, seldom spoken of. Think you not that the
shame that comes from heartaches or mistaken actions is any greater than
the shame those feel who feel no abundance, who suffer a lack of money.
There is still a commonly held belief that abundance is a favor of God
and, as such, those who do not experience abundance have done something
wrong. We will return to this, but first let’s continue with the denial
of money’s effect. 

<sup>3.21</sup> The shame and pain of heartaches and mistakes are more
often and more easily spoken of than the shame of monetary failure.
Certainly much complaining and general fretting are done, but only to
the degree in which you feel you are in the same circumstances of those
to whom you complain. To speak of money matters with someone who might
have more than you, you would consider a shaming act. You would fear
that they might think you want something from them and you would suffer
embarrassment. To speak of money with anyone who has less might open the
door for a request for what you do not feel you have to give. To reach a
position in which you feel you need to ask for money from others, even
from a bank, is seen as a dire situation indeed. This asking will likely
be an ordeal of some consequence. Even those who are seen by others as
constant “takers,” unafraid to ask for a “hand out” or free lunch,
experience these same emotions, the buildup of anger, resentment, and
shame. 

<sup>3.22</sup> In the realm of money lie your biggest failures, your
greatest fears, the risks you have taken or not taken, your hopes for
success.  What you wish for is contingent upon having the “means” to
pursue it, and few of you truly think that money would not solve most of
your problems. Even those of you on this spiritual path think money is
among the greatest limits to what you can accomplish, to how you can
live the life you would choose to live. You may have left behind
aspirations of wealth, and replaced them with ideas of having more time,
more fulfilling work, simpler pleasures, and yet you still see your new
state as one that does not touch upon this aspect of “reality.” The
better life you might attain will be a by-product rather than the effect
of Cause. 

<sup>3.23</sup> Here is the *real* of the old “reality” most solid and
unrelenting.  Not having “enough” is the “reality” of your life because
it was the reality of the learning life. Even if you are one of those
others consider lucky, one of those who always has “just enough,” little
do others know that your fear is as great as theirs. That while you
admit you have “enough,” you are sure it will not be enough for what the
future holds. And if you ever need evidence for this position, it is
quick to come. As soon as you get just a little bit ahead, a need
arises. The roof leaks, the car breaks down, and an endless series of
needs arise. This “evidence” is exactly what you have sought. 

<sup>3.24</sup> This is the way fears operate. They operate in the
pattern of the ego, a pattern that was learned, a pattern that was
emphasized and reemphasized through external events so that it would not
be forgotten, so that it would reinforce wants until this attitude of
wanting seemed impossible to unlearn. It is a pattern of survival, but
not of *your* survival. It is the pattern of the ego’s survival, and
even though the ego is no longer with you, the pattern remains because
what you learned, and the way in which you learned it, remains. 

<sup>3.25</sup> Remember, you have learned that nothing is “given,” for
what use would you have of learning if such were not the case? In our
dialogue, we have begun to use examples of what you did not learn in
order to demonstrate that what you learned is not true. What you learned
is insane. But to realize the truth you must now fully reject the
untruths that you learned. You must fully reject the ideas that taught
you that you do not have enough, that you will only have what you can
earn or learn, that only through effort will you gain, and that with
your gain will come another’s loss. In other words, here is where you
must accept the teachings of this Course.  

<sup>3.26</sup> Do not feel dejected that you have not learned these
things. They *were* learned, to the degree that you could learn them
within the teachings of *A Course of Love*. But beyond learning is where
we now stand. We now stand at the place of the rejection of learning—the
rejection of all you learned. 

<sup>3.27</sup> Let me set your mind at ease, for you are not called to
sacrifice, as you have been told time and time again. I do not ask you
to give up what you desire, but to expect and accept a response to what
you desire.  Remember that we are headed even beyond desire, and know
that desire must first be met before you can be taken beyond it. 

<sup>3.28</sup> The condition of want, like all conditions of learning,
ended with the end of learning. The condition of want was a learning
device—not one of divine design, but one of the thought system of the
ego. It was a trick to keep you constantly striving for more, a trick to
guarantee the survival of the ego-self, a trick that provided the small
rewards of time-bound evolution, the small rewards that would keep you
assured of progress through effort, and just as assured of ruin through
lack of effort. 

<sup>3.29</sup> You think abundance is the most difficult thing to
demonstrate, when it is actually the easiest. You think you could learn
what is for you the most difficult type of learning, be it philosophy,
math, or foreign languages, before you could learn how to make money, or
in other words, to have abundance.  You think you could more easily find
love than money, even those of you who have felt loveless for too long
to contemplate. And those of you who scoff at these remarks, because you
feel you have learned the secret of money, the secret of success: Answer
truly if you really believe this, or if you are merely covering over
your fear of not having enough with an incessant drive to prove it is
not so. 

<sup>3.30</sup> Just as so many of you are thankful for your good health
while at the same time dreading the disease that may at any point take
it from you, those of you who have money see it in the same way. You may
go along just fine for weeks or months or years, unworried about your
health until the slightest pain makes you think of cancer. In this same
way, there are not any of you, those who have money or those who have
none, who feel that your financial “health” is any more secure than the
“health” of your body.

<sup>3.31</sup> How can you live like this? How can you have any peace
when you live like this? What succor will your inheritance provide if
thoughts like these accompany your inheritance? Were this a monetary
inheritance, would you not squirrel it away for a rainy day, or spend it
only with trepidation and an eye upon the bank account? Even those of
you who would feel prepared to let it bring you joy would err in
thinking that it could. How many times has what you thought would
provide you with reason for joy failed to do so once acquired? 

<sup>3.32</sup> And so you might think, here, of what *has* brought you
joy. A home, a garden, a musical instrument, the equipment that enabled
a hobby or talent to be developed, a well-loved book, dinner with a
friend, a new car, a new pet, the ability to provide a child with a good
education. 

<sup>3.33</sup> You might think here too that money made from what you
love to do has a different quality than money earned from toil. You
might think that money earned from what you love to do is the answer,
just as you might think that money spent on the more lasting pleasures
such as the things described above is the secret. 

<sup>3.34</sup> For you are quite certain that there is a secret you
know not.  There is, and it is a secret I will try to share with you
here, if you can let your disbelief and anger at this suggestion fall
away. I know you expect a flowery answer, and surely not one that will
be a “one, two, three steps to abundance” answer; but I will try to
address you in an in-between tone, one that will not cause you to feel
spoken down to or incite your hostility. One that will not only be
truthful, but as practical as you need it to be. 

<sup>3.35</sup> You have been told that the time of the Holy Spirit, the
time of a need for an intermediary between yourself and God, is gone.
You have been invited to know God directly, and to develop a
relationship with God. It is only in knowing God that the relationship
of abundance will be made clear to you and break forever the chains of
want. 

<sup>3.36</sup> Learning is no longer the *way* for good reason. It
exemplifies the difference between information and wisdom, between
finding an answer and finding a way or path. Many have read the words of
the Bible, the words of Lao-tzu, the words of Buddha.  To teach is to
convey the known. To speak of a *way* is to invite dialogue and a
journey. This is what all master “teachers” taught, often throwing the
questions posed back upon the poser, in order to say: Use me not as an
intermediary. It is only in relationship with the God within that the
way will become clear. 

<sup>3.37</sup> To read the inspired wisdom of teachers such as these in
order to “learn” has prevented the very relationship that these teachers
sought to impart. 

<sup>3.38</sup> What you have “learned,” and since the time of learning
had revealed to you, is a new *way*, the way of direct relationship with
God, the way of knowing through discovery.  Remember always that knowing
through discovery is knowing what was not known before, and keep this in
mind as we consider the knowing of abundance. 

<sup>3.39</sup> When you have felt the reality of union, you have felt
the place in which no want exists. You felt this through the
responsiveness of the relationship that is unity. You perhaps desired an
answer that “came to you” through no process you had known before. We
spoke of this as thoughts you did not think. We spoke of these thoughts
you did not think coming with authority and certainty, a certainty you
had previously lacked. When I said earlier in this chapter that you are
most comfortable learning through the mind because of your familiarity
with the pattern of learning through the mind, you can perhaps see why
these first revelations of union would come to you in a way associated
with the mind. 

<sup>3.40</sup> You have accepted now, because of whatever experiences
of unity you have had, that the knowing of unity is available to you.
You may not have given great consideration to the access through which
that availability arose, but since for most of you it has arisen as
thoughts you did not think, if you were to make an association in
regards to entry, you would likely say the entry point was the mind.
This is, in a sense, true, as wholeheartedness is comprised of the mind
and heart joined in unity. It would be more true to think of this
joining as creating a portal of access, a new source of entry. But these
points do not advance our discussion now and can be returned to later.
The point here is your “concept” or idea about what you have gained from
unity thus far being that which can be gained through the mind. As you
advance, and as you become more open to other means of accessing the
wisdom you once sought through learning, or through the mind, other
means will open to you. You may see, audibly hear, and interact with
what comes to you from union. 

<sup>3.41</sup> The idea I am trying to open to you here is the idea of
a responsive relationship with unity that does not exist only within the
mind of the wholehearted.

<sup>3.42</sup> It is the visible world, the outer world, through which
your wants find provision. It is the world of unity, the true reality,
through which your desires are responded to. This does not mean that the
place of unity is a place that does not interact with the place of form.
It is interacting with the world of form *through you*. 

<sup>3.43</sup> Do you not see? You are the entry point, the only
channel through which all that is available in unity can flow. 

<sup>3.44</sup> Abundance is the natural state of unity and thus your
natural state, just as certainty rather than uncertainty is your natural
state, just as joy rather than sorrow is your natural state. What you
are being asked to do here, is to open the self of form to the place of
unity, thus allowing this divine flow of union into the elevated Self of
form. 

<sup>3.45</sup> Being open to the divine flow of union is the exact
opposite of the condition of anger. Anger could be likened to an
argument, a debate, in which you are on one side and determined to be
the one who is right, the one whose side will win. What you hope to win,
in this insane argument about abundance, is an acknowledgment, even from
God, that you do not have what you need, that you are lacking, and that
because of this, you have no choice but to continue to struggle and
strive, to earn and to learn, to, in short, carry on in the world as you
always have. 

<sup>3.46</sup> Even those of you who would claim to know this anger
not, who would claim to wait in trusting silence for God’s provision,
are still waiting for provision. Even those of you who have asked God
for abundance, and opened yourselves to receive it, even those of you
who have seen some improvement or evidence you could cite as a response
to your requests, see not the truth of the situation. 

<sup>3.47</sup> You still believe the truth of the situation to be the
reality of physical form and of what you have or have not within the
confines of that form. This would be like still seeing the mind as the
only source of learning, and learning as the only source of knowledge.
What you have begun to see is that the mind is not the source of
certainty, no matter how much knowledge it attains. What you have
perhaps begun to see in similar terms, is that money is also not the
source of certainty, no matter how much it enables you to attain.
Certainty, in other words, comes from somewhere else. This somewhere
else we have defined as your true reality, the reality of union. Living
in this reality, the reality of certainty, is the only key to abundance. 

<sup>3.48</sup> These words are just what you may have expected to hear,
and you may feel a return of feelings of anger here. But we have said
that there is a function for your anger.  The function of anger is to
lead you to the step beyond it, the step of action and ideas, the step
often called that of bargaining. 

<sup>3.49</sup> Many of you will have already entered this step, this
step of considering how what you might *do* might affect the response of
God. You take this step without realizing that you are still acting in
accord with ideas of it being an “if this, then that” world. You try to
guess what God might want you to do, be it being still and not worrying
about money, or taking actions, right-actions now, as opposed to your
idea of the wrong-actions of the past, in order to bring money or
abundance flowing to you. All that this period of bargaining represents
is yet another stage in your movement toward acceptance. It is still
based on the belief that you are responsible for the abundance or lack
of abundance in your life. That it is you who, by changing your beliefs
or your actions, can change your reality. 

<sup>3.50</sup> This is often a hopeful period and it, too, is not
without value.  You may have many good and even inspired ideas within
this time. You may feel as if you are on the right track, that through
the planning out of strategy and action, through putting all that you
have learned into practice, you are sure to begin to see the benefits
that have been promised. But many of your ideas and actions at this
stage will be tinged with the anger that came before it. Here is where
you may rail at the unfairness, at the unseen benefits of what you have
acquired from this learning, of promises seemingly made and not kept.
Where, you may ask, is the lack of struggle that has been promised? Why
do you still have to try so hard? Work so long? Endure so much? Why
isn’t the end in sight? 

<sup>3.51</sup> The final stage in this process, this movement toward
acceptance, is depression, a lowering of spirits and energy, a lack of
desire, a lack of activity, a sinking feeling of going under, of going
into the depths of sadness and despair. 

<sup>3.52</sup> Each stage may contain hints of the other, but in regard
to money, or abundance, each stage is experienced and felt. This
experience has only one combined value, one combined purpose, the
purpose of the final letting-go, the final surrender that is necessary
for the final acceptance to come into being. 

<sup>3.53</sup> Just as you were told you cannot “think” great ideas
into being, or great talent into fruition, just as you were told, in
other words, that the “givens” are not to be dealt with by the
conscious, or “thinking” mind, so too is it with abundance.  Abundance
can only be accepted and received, just as great ideas and great talent
can only be accepted and received. 

<sup>3.54</sup> You might argue now that what you do with great ideas
and great talent is of consequence, and this is true. A great idea or
great talent that is not brought into form, that is not expressed, that
is not shared, is no greater than a seed not planted. But the gift of
the great idea, the great talent, must first be seen and recognized,
acknowledged and accepted, before it can be brought into form,
expressed, and shared.  What good would it do you to say “if I had
talent,” I would accept and receive it, express and share it. “If I had
a great idea,” I would accept and receive it, express it and share it.
And yet you continue to think that *if you had money or abundance*, you
would accept and receive it, express it and share it.  

<sup>3.55</sup> This *if* is all that stands between you and abundance.

<sup>3.56</sup> You do not believe this, however, and the functions of
denial, anger, bargaining, and depression are to lead you to this belief
and, finally, to this acceptance. Acceptance first that you do not
believe.  And then acceptance itself. 

<sup>3.57</sup> Do you see the difference, even here, in belief and
acceptance? Can you begin to see acceptance as an active function, much
as learning was an active function? Acceptance is an active function. It
is something given you to do. You think it is difficult, but it is only
difficult until it becomes easy. 

<sup>3.58</sup> While you think of acceptance as just another word,
another concept, another trick of the mind, you will not see it as the
replacement of learning, and as such as an active state, a state in
which you begin to work with what is beyond learning, a state in which
you are in relationship with what is beyond learning. It is in truth, a
state in which you enter into an alternative reality, the reality of
union—*because* you accept that reality. 

<sup>3.59</sup> Like all that was taught within this Course, this is a
matter of all or nothing. You cannot accept part of one reality and part
of another. You cannot accept, for instance, the compassionate and
loving benevolence of the universe, of God, of the All of All, and still
accept the reality of lack. You cannot accept that in the reality of
unity all things come to you without effort or striving except money.
You cannot accept that you no longer have to learn and accept the
condition of learning that is want. 

<sup>3.60</sup> Active acceptance is what allows the great
transformation from life as you have known it, to death of that old
life, to rebirth of new life.  By clinging to some of the old, you
prevent its death and you prevent the rebirth of the new. You prevent
the very life-giving resurrection you await. You prevent the elevation
of the self of form. 

<sup>3.61</sup> This does not have to be. You have wanted something to
do to change your circumstances in this earthly reality. This is what
you have to do.  This is the action required. The active acceptance of
abundance is the way to abundance. Active acceptance is a way of being
in relationship with all that flows from unity. This you cannot learn
but you can practice. Thus your practice begins.

