---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "5"
title: "Day 5: Access to Unity"
---

<sup>5.1</sup> A point of access will no longer be needed once full
entry is attained, just as a key is no longer needed once a door has
been unlocked and passed through. Even though it will not be permanently
needed, however, this point of access will remain crucial as long as you
*maintain* rather than *sustain* the state of unity. This point of
access will thus now be discussed, both as an initial entry point and as
a continued entry point so that it is available to you until it is no
longer needed. 

<sup>5.2</sup> For each of you this access point will in truth be the
same, but perhaps quite different in the action which you use in order
to enter it. For those of you who have felt the point of entry to be the
mind in experiences already registered, there is no need to combat this
feeling.  For those of you who have felt the state of unity through
experiences of the heart, there is again, no need to struggle against
this. Let me elaborate. 

<sup>5.3</sup> For many of you, “thoughts you did not think” are among
your first experiences of unity. Thus, just as when you might look up
when trying to remember something, or tap a finger at your temple, there
is, in a certain sense, a “place” to which you turn for these
experiences. This does not mean that these experiences come from your
mind or from a place just beyond your physical concept of the mind but,
since *you* are not your body, the idea of what originates “within”
coming from a point beyond the body is not now too unbelievable to
contemplate. 

<sup>5.4</sup> As we said yesterday, our form of meditation, a
meditation that is not a tool but a function of your natural Self, is a
focus on access.  Thus we begin with what feels natural to you. We give
access a focal point in the realm of form. 

<sup>5.5</sup> This focal point must be of your own choosing. Your point
of access may be your head, or a place just above or to the right or
left of your head. It may be your heart, or some mid-point just beyond
the body. It may, for some, feel like a connection that arises from the
earth and as if it is just below the form of the physical body. Some
could feel it in their hands and others as if it comes directly from
their mouths as speech is enabled that bypasses the realm of thought
completely. Do not fight any of these feelings or others that I have not
named. Just consider them givens and choose what feels most natural to
you as a focal point for your focus on access. 

<sup>5.6</sup> What we have focused on for some time now is love. Love
never changes. It thus is the same for each of us. Yet not one of us
expresses love in exactly the same way as another. This is important to
remember now as you begin to work with your access to unity. 

<sup>5.7</sup> Unity and Love—as we have within this work shown them to
be—are the same. 

<sup>5.8</sup> Thus, access too is the same. It exists. It is there for
you. It is given. It cannot be denied unless you deny it. It is only
because you have not known this that we speak of it in this way here.  

<sup>5.9</sup> Just as it is helpful in some instances to associate love
with your heart even though we have identified heart as the center of
the Self rather than the pump that functions as part of your body, it
will be helpful to have identified this chosen access point for unity
even while remembering it is not of the body alone. 

<sup>5.10</sup> While the purpose of this work was to have you identify
love and thus your Self, correctly, there is still fine-tuning to your
understanding to be done, and this will be done as you come to know what
unity is, and so more fully come to know your Self and love.

<sup>5.11</sup> There would seem to be one major difference between
unity and love and that difference would seem to be love’s ability to be
given away.

<sup>5.12</sup> Access to unity will seem, at first, a quite individual
accomplishment, something one may have and another may not. While this
remains the case, you may desire to give others what you have and feel
unable to do so. Yet, like love, unity is known through its effects. All
the benefits of union can be given away to any willing to receive.

<sup>5.13</sup> While you do not consider yourself as having or needing
an “access” point to love, and while you may treat love still as an
individual attribute intimately associated with the Self you are, you
know love is not an attribute and that all love comes from the same
Source. You know you have been able to “give” love only when you have
felt you “have” love to give. You thus have long known the truth of
giving and receiving as one within your own heart. You might think of
access in the same way—as enabling you to realize that you “have” the
benefits of union to give. 

<sup>5.14</sup> Like love, unity has one source and many expressions. It
will be in your unique expression of union that your Self will come to
wholeness and you will be fully who you are and able to express love
fully. 

<sup>5.15</sup> Realize here that although you are now a part of a
community seeking the same goal, the realization, or “making real” of
your accomplishment, and its expression, will not look the same way
twice.  What you each desire from union most will be what finds the
greatest expression through you. 

<sup>5.16</sup> A “healer” for instance, might, thus, feel her access
point as being the hands and express what is gained through unity by a
laying on of hands. Similarly, you might say healing is one of the ways
the healer expresses love. In truth healing and love are the same. 

<sup>5.17</sup> Who you are now, what your desires are, and where your
talents have been recognized, are as given as the goal you now desire to
realize.  Again I remind you that the sameness of union is not about
becoming clones or one specific type of idealized holy person. Union is
being fully who you are and expressing fully who you are. This is the
miracle, the goal, the accomplishment that is achieved through the reign
of love, the maintenance and finally the sustainability of union.

<sup>5.18</sup> Realize here that while you want to know the specifics
of how this thing called access to unity will work, you are also
impatient with specifics. You want immediate results, not more practice.
You want relief and an end to effort, not another lesson to learn that
you will be told is not a lesson. Not another cause for seeming effort
in order to arrive at the effortless. But realize also that this effort
that you rail against is still of your own choosing. The realization of
a “way” to make things as they are is never effortful in and of itself. 

<sup>5.19</sup> As you may seem to pause here in your movement in order
to understand the way in which that movement is achieved, you will
almost surely once again have doubts. Doubts are never more pronounced
than when specifics are being dealt with. Yet you continue to desire
specifics. This is because you are still entrenched in the pattern of
learning, as your earnest effort to leave effort behind implies.
Remember that union cannot be learned, for if it could be, the time of
learning would be perpetuated rather than ended. 

<sup>5.20</sup> Remember that you are tired of learning. You are tired
here, after your climb. You simply want to rest and have whatever
transformation is to come to you to come. If you could indeed give in to
this desire fully, it would speed the transformation along quite nicely.
So please, listen to your weariness and to your heart’s desire to rest.
Listen to the call to peace and let yourself recline in the embrace of
love, feeling the warm earth beneath you and the heat of the sun above
you.  Let languor enfold you and apply no effort to what you read here.
Just accept what is given. All that is being given is the helpful hints
you have desired from an older brother who has experienced what you, as
yet, have not. 

<sup>5.21</sup> In this frame of mind, we can return more specifically
to our focus on access. Wherever your chosen point of access lies,
imagine now the needle that was discussed as passing through the onion
in the Course chapter “The Intersection,” and imagine the point of
intersection connecting with your chosen access point. Imagine this now,
not as a needle but as the wisdom you seek. Imagine this wisdom not as
being stopped by the layers of thinking and feeling that we used the
onion to illustrate, but as a point of entry and pass-through. What
comes of unity enters you and passes through you to the world. This is
the relationship you have with unity while in form—a relationship of
intersection and pass-through.

<sup>5.22</sup> No longer will what enters you get stopped by layers of
defenses.  No longer will it meet the road-block of your thinking, your
effort, your attempts to figure out how to do it and what it all means.
There is no cause for such effort. Effort is only a layer of defense, a
stop gap between what you would receive and what you would give in which
the ego once made its bid to claim ownership. Effort, as translated by
the ego, was about turning everything that was given into what “you”
could only work hard to attain, and thereby claim as your individual
accomplishment. Obviously, union is not about this. While the ego is
gone, effort remains, and while it remains, you will not realize full
access to what you are given. We are speaking here of letting your form
serve union and union serve your form. This service is effortless for it
is the way of creation. Again, this is why the “effort” of learning must
cease. 

<sup>5.23</sup> Let’s return to the image of the healer that was
discussed earlier.  While many will heal, all attempts to teach or learn
“how to” heal must be thwarted, for if not, the pattern of learning will
remain.  This is why there have always seemed to be “secrets” held among
the great healers and spiritual guides. They have understood that what
they have gained access to cannot be taught. This has not meant that
they were not eager to share, only that the means of sharing was not one
of teaching or learning.  

<sup>5.24</sup> Each expression of union must remain as what it
is—untaught and unlearned. Each gain from unity will only, in this way,
be seen as the new givens come to replace learning. 

<sup>5.25</sup> Remember this as well as you focus on your access to
unity. Focus does not mean thinking. Focus does not mean learning.
Remember the example of how your breathing becomes unnatural when you
think about it, and contrast this with the increase in awareness of
breath that comes from the focus of meditation. A focus point is a point
of convergence. A focal point is a point of intersection that gives rise
to a clear image. 

<sup>5.26</sup> The intersection spoken of here is that of pass-through.
Although we have spoken of this focal point as an entryway, this does
not imply that something that is not of you is entering you, and it does
not imply entry without exit. When you think of breathing, you may think
of inhaling as taking in air, and of air as something that is not “of”
you.  But the air you breathe is “of” you. You may think of the air you
exhale as being more “of” you, but there is no more or less to the
relationship of entry and exit. You are in continual relationship with
the air you breathe and in continual relationship with unity. It is a
constant exchange. When you are fully aware of this is when full access
is attained. So we will continue our work now in releasing you from
those things that would still block your full awareness.

