---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "1"
title: "Day 1: Accept Me"
---

<sup>1.1</sup> Acceptance of me is acceptance of your Self. Acceptance
of me is acceptance of your inheritance. This is nothing new to those of
you of the Christian faith. To others it will seem an acceptance beyond
your ability, an acceptance that there is no real cause to request. Why
must Jesus be accepted? Why cannot the truth be accepted? Why cannot
everyone hold their distinct beliefs as long as they are beliefs in the
truth?

<sup>1.2</sup> Beliefs are not what is being spoken of here. *Acceptance
is*.  Acceptance is not belief, it is not prayer. I care not in what
form of the truth you believe, nor to what god you believe you send your
prayers; although if you do not believe in your Self above a form of
truth, and if you continue to send your prayers to a god who is other
than you, you will not cross the threshold. 

<sup>1.3</sup> We are here on the top of the mountain together,
beginning our work together. I am no longer your teacher, but there is a
reason that you are here with *me*. You have been listening to *my*
words, and these words are what have brought you here, not to a place
but to an ascended state.  Without your acceptance of who I am, you will
not fully accept who you are. Without your willingness to achieve this
acceptance, you will not receive the secret of succession presented
here. You can read of it still, but it will not convey to you what it
will convey to those who have accepted me. You will return to level
ground with eyes unopened and listen to parables once again and learn
once again from the stories of others. 

<sup>1.4</sup> Why should this be so important? Why not leave well
enough alone? If acceptance of Jesus is a stumbling block for many, why
should it be required? A college education has requirements. If math is
a stumbling block for some, a foreign language for another, are these
requirements waived? Let us just accept that requirements are
prerequisites for many states you value. To marry one man you must
choose to leave others behind. This is required. This does not mean the
married woman will not relate to many men in many ways, have many male
friends, teachers, guides. It means that one is chosen as a mate to the
exclusion of others chosen as a mate. 

<sup>1.5</sup> In these examples we are talking of simple requirements,
requirements of daily life rather than of eternal life. The requirement
asked of you here is not to exclude others in whom you believe and have
found a connection to eternal life, only to accept me as who I am. 

<sup>1.6</sup> Now that you have moved beyond the thought system of the
ego self, you look back on it and realize why you could not know your
Self while the ego was your guide. You were required to make a choice
between the thought system of the ego and the thought system of unity.
This choice was made, and thus you have arrived here and left behind the
state of the initiate, the time of waiting. You have chosen. You are
merely asked now to look at what you have chosen and to understand what
you inherit through the secret of succession.  

<sup>1.7</sup> If you are to succeed me, you must accept me, much as you
must accept your ascension to this mountain peak and this dialogue that
is occurring here. If you believe this mountain peak is merely
metaphorical, you will not realize that you have ascended or that you
have left behind the conditions of the initiate. If you believe these
are words of wisdom and that you can remain ambivalent about their
source, you will not know me nor accept me, and you will not know or
accept your Self. 

<sup>1.8</sup> Why are we so linked that your ability to know your Self
is contingent upon your ability to know me? Because *I am*. This is akin
to saying *Love is*. I am what *is*. I am the way, the truth, and the
life. 

<sup>1.9</sup> Not accepting me would be like training to be an
astronaut and, at the moment of takeoff, refusing the requirement of the
spacecraft as the way to reach outer space. This would be akin to
non-acceptance of the way that has been given to bring your desire to
fruition. The spacecraft could be seen as a response to your desire. So
too can I. 

<sup>1.10</sup> This would be like saying, “If I am an astronaut, I can
reach outer space without a spacecraft. I have been trained, I
understand the truth about outer space, I believe in my abilities; but I
do not accept the spacecraft as necessary.” Lest this example fail to
move you I will continue. 

<sup>1.11</sup> Many people now are discovering the power of healing.
Some think this power comes from one source and some from another. You
may think that, as long as the power is called forth, it matters not the
name by which it is called. You may think that it all comes from the
same source, regardless of what the practitioner of healing calls it, be
the practitioner a faith healer or a medical doctor. You may make one
exclusive choice to attend to your needs of healing, or you may make
many choices. You may think these choices matter not, but only the power
of the healer. Some of you may see this example as an example of why you
should not need to accept me. You may claim that you understand that
this power is of God, whether it be the power of granting life to grow
within the womb, or the power of giving new life to a limb withered or
broken. You may wonder why it should matter whether this power be called
Buddha or Allah, Muhammad or God.

<sup>1.12</sup> It matters not. The power of God is not what is being
spoken of here. It is *our* power that is being spoken of here. The
power of the god man. The power of God brought into form. The power of
who we are rather than the power of who God is. 

<sup>1.13</sup> God cares not what you call Him. God knows who He is. It
is man who has known not who he is, and it is through me that this
knowing can be returned. This is simply the way it is. It is not about
being right or being wrong, about one being more and others less. This
is simply the way to sameness of being, to the reunion of all, from the
holiest of the holy to the lowliest of the lowly.

<sup>1.14</sup> Had any of the holy men and women who walked the way of
the world since my time learned, accepted, and lived the teachings that
have brought you to this point which I now would like to lead you
beyond, the world would be a different place. Have I not called you to a
new time in which the conditions of learning exist no more? In which the
suffering and death that have obscured that love is the answer are
banished, rejected, and a new world of love accepted in their place?  

<sup>1.15</sup> You are all beloved sons and daughters of love itself,
no matter what you call that love. You all are equally beloved. That you
give your devotion to one religious tradition or another matters not.
That you accept that I am he who can lead you beyond your life of misery
to new life matters absolutely. 

<sup>1.16</sup> I am not your teacher and you are not called to follow
me blindly.  But you are called to follow, or succeed me. Only in this
way can new life be brought to old. 

<sup>1.17</sup> Your desire to know me has grown as you have read these
words and grown closer to your Self. This is because we are One. To know
me is to know your Self. 

<sup>1.18</sup> Let us return a moment to the creation story and my
acknowledgment that this creation story is occurring in each and every
one of us. Let me move forward and speak a moment of Adam and Eve and
the fall from paradise. Let us extend our idea of the creation story to
include the creation of man and woman.  Adam and Eve represent your
birth into form.  <sup>I</sup> represent your birth into what is beyond
form. Adam and Eve represent what occurred within you at the beginning
of the story of your creation.  <sup>I</sup> represent what occurred
within you recently, the story of your rebirth through this Course.

<sup>1.19</sup> The story of Adam and Eve, and the story of Jesus, are
within you.  *As within, so without*. In each of you is Adam and Eve
represented in form. In each of you am I represented in form. 

<sup>1.20</sup> The New Testament was the beginning of the new. My life
represented fulfillment of scripture, of all holy writing, of all
learned wisdom. In fulfillment are endings found and beginnings created. 

<sup>1.21</sup> This fulfillment of scripture has now occurred within
you. When it occurred within me, it occurred within all.  It became part
of the continuing story of creation, of creation acted out within the
created. 

<sup>1.22</sup> The story came after the fact. Thus the fulfillment was
always part of the story of creation. It was always part of you as it
was always part of me. 1.23 There is no story to project what comes
next—no accomplished story. There is only scripture unfulfilled, the
promise of inheritance or the threat of doom. Myth too stops short of
fulfillment, of return to paradise. 

<sup>1.24</sup> Yet this return to paradise, to your true Self and your
true home, is written within you. It only needs to be lived to become
real. You must accept me because I lived it and made it real for you.
You must accept me because I am the part of you that can guide you
beyond what I accomplished to the accomplishment of creation, and beyond
creation to the story not yet written, the future not yet created. To
the realization of paradise and of your true Self and true home, in a
form that will take you beyond time to eternity. 

<sup>1.25</sup> This has been spoken of as the second coming of Christ
because my story goes unfulfilled without your fulfillment. It is only
in your fulfillment of the continuing story of creation that my story
reaches completion. It is a story whose completion cannot occur in
singular form, but as with any true inheritance only in a series, only
in a joining together of all of the parts of the creation story into the
wholeness of the story’s end. As a story is seen to move from one
element to another in an unbroken chain of events, so too is the story
of creation. As history proceeds with gaps only waiting to be fulfilled
in current time, so too is it with the story of creation. 

<sup>1.26</sup> You are living history. You are living what will
tomorrow be history. You are living creation. You are living what will
tomorrow be the story of creation. A chain of events is merely another
way of saying cause and effect. The chain of events of creation include,
thus far, the movement of being into form and the movement of being
beyond form. What will be realized through the secret of succession is
the elevation of form.

<sup>1.27</sup> You can only fast from wanting by realizing what it is
you desire.  My forty days and forty nights on the mountain succeeded my
baptism and my acknowledgment as the Son of God, and preceded my time of
living as my Self in the world. So too does it with you. You long for
and desire me because our story is the same. You are living my story as
I lived yours. They are one story. 

<sup>1.28</sup> Lay aside your want of other answers, other stories, and
accept the story we share. The Bible and all holy texts can be seen
clearly now as one creation story. One story of one beginning. One story
with many promises made. Promises of inheritance and fulfillment,
promises that give hints to, but never quite reveal, the secret of
succession. 

<sup>1.29</sup> I am the secret of succession, the way and the life, the
beginning of the end of the story that is to be fulfilled, brought to
completion and wholeness in you and in me, so that together we bring
about the second coming of Christ and the elevation of the Self of form.

