---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "2"
title: "Day 2: Accept Your Self"
---

<sup>2.1</sup> Acceptance of your Self is acceptance of me. Acceptance
of your Self is acceptance of your inheritance. Now is the time to come
into full acceptance of the human self as well as the Self of unity. It
is time for the final merging of the two into One Self, the elevated
Self of form. 

<sup>2.2</sup> You have let go the ego, re-viewed your life, unlearned
previous patterns, and now see the difference between the image you hold
of yourself and your present Self. But still, in unguarded moments, in
moments in which you would desire peace, memories of your life continue
to play within your mind, often still bringing you sadness and regrets.

<sup>2.3</sup> All of these moments you review have brought you here.
But I realize that you have not as yet developed the capacity to accept
this fully.  For most of you, much of what you have considered your
mistakes and poor choices have been reconciled. You can see the pattern
of your life as clearly now as if a masterful biography had been written
of it. It is this clarity that has brought a new “haunting” to some of
you. Your life is being seen more as a whole now. The parts are fitting
together. You can see how you have moved from seeming purposelessness to
purpose.

<sup>2.4</sup> You are like an inventor who wasted many years, much
money, and endured many hardships over many projects that did not come
to fruition, and now has succeeded in inventing just what was always
envisioned. This is the moment of fulfillment and desire coming
together, the time in which to realize “it was all worth it.” 

<sup>2.5</sup> This is the time of revelation of meaning. You who have
so long striven to give meaning to the purposeless, here see meaning
revealed. 

<sup>2.6</sup> And yet you cannot still some of your regrets. The
feeling is not as strong as it once was, and you are very unlikely to
still experience guilt or shame; but the hurts you have done others may
weigh heavily on you now. It is as if, at this mountain peak, you have
discovered a lightness of being, and yet within it is this stone of
regret. You continue to have a nagging feeling that this stone of regret
will always keep you anchored to the self you once were, that no matter
how high you ascend, it will continue to drag you back. 

<sup>2.7</sup> This is the feeling that will prevent you from receiving
the secret of succession. It is like the force of gravity, a feeling
that you will not be able to remain at this height long enough to
benefit from what will be shared here. 

<sup>2.8</sup> Part of this feeling arises from erroneous ideas that
remain regarding your unworthiness. Part of this feeling arises from the
erroneous idea that you can fail, even here.  These are the temptations
that confront those who have dared to ascend the mountain. It is not the
height you have attained that causes your fear of falling. It is the
depths to which you feel you once descended that calls forth your fear
here. 

<sup>2.9</sup> These are mainly, in truth, judgments, judgments that
arise from your conscience, from that part of you that has compared your
actions actions to the laws of man and God and found yourself guilty. 

<sup>2.10</sup> Let me ask you now, are these feelings—feelings that are
attached to your belief that you have harmed others—not feelings of
sorrow? Are you not sorry for these actions? Have you not expressed your
wish that you had acted differently? Can you see a way to change the
past or to “make up for” what occurred in the past?

<sup>2.11</sup> Now is the time for acceptance, even of these actions
that you would rather not accept. They happened. They were what they
were. I ask you not to forget. If your home had been destroyed by a
tornado or a flood rather than adultery and divorce, would you not see
the benefit of accepting what had occurred and moving on? You might
counter this by saying that if you had been the adulterer, the cause of
the divorce, this was different than a tornado or a flood. Yes, this was
different, but this difference does not place these actions beyond the
idea of acceptance. 

<sup>2.12</sup> Conversely, were you the innocent “victim” of an
adulterous mate, a mate whose actions led to divorce and the destruction
of your home, can you not accept that this is something that happened?
We leave aside, for the moment, any considerations of other outcomes of
such actions, whether they are negative or positive in your judgment. We
look for a simple acceptance of the facts of your life. 

<sup>2.13</sup> I could give thousands of examples here, but the point
is that we are not looking for degrees of wrong-actions, or wrongdoing.
You all have moments you wish you could re-enact, decisions you wish you
could change. These actions are unchangeable. This is why simple
acceptance is needed. 

<sup>2.14</sup> We speak not of forgiveness or even atonement here, for
these have been thoroughly discussed earlier. You have all been through
the time of tenderness, the time that preceded your giving and receiving
of forgiveness, your request for and granting of atonement, your
re-viewing and unlearning of the perceived lessons of your life. 

<sup>2.15</sup> But just as you are called here to accept me despite
possible misgivings such as religious beliefs, you are called to accept
yourself.  This unconditional acceptance is necessary. I will give you
one final example in order to make our discussion as clear as possible. 

<sup>2.16</sup> This is an example from my own life, an example the idea
of which still plagues many of you. This example is that of the
crucifixion. 

<sup>2.17</sup> For many of you the crucifixion is among the reasons you
hesitate to fully accept me. It is hard for you to believe that my
suffering was symbolic of the end of yours when so much suffering has
continued. I will add here the example of my resurrection. It is hard
for you to believe that my resurrection heralded eternal life when death
has been a constant companion of all those who have lived since my time.
It is difficult for you to believe that by following me you will not
walk in my footsteps. Perhaps you will be granted eternal life, but not
until you have suffered as I suffered.  This idea would hardly be a
joyful idea with which to begin our work together. 

<sup>2.18</sup> As was said within this Course, my life is the example
life. The way in which I have talked of it recently may have led some of
you to consider it as a symbolic life rather than an actual life. All of
our lives here are symbolic rather than actual. Just as the creation
story is symbolic rather than actual. This does not mean that my life
did not happen, that it did not occur in time and space, just as yours
is occurring now in time and space. What this means is that what occurs
in time and space is symbolic, that it is representative of something
more. 

<sup>2.19</sup> So let us consider my life again, just briefly, and let
us consider the something more it may represent. 

<sup>2.20</sup> My life consisted of the same major elements as yours:
Birth through childhood, maturity, and with that maturity action in the
world, suffering, death, and resurrection. 

<sup>2.21</sup> You have accounts of my actions that begin with the
appearance of my form in the world, but that mainly occur during my time
of maturity.  These accounts do not stress the time of childhood as it
is a time commonly held to be one of innocence. The accounts of my
maturity generally begin with the recognition of who I am. This is
symbolic of the idea put forth here that until you are aware of who you
are, your life has not literally or symbolically begun. 

<sup>2.22</sup> It was in awareness of who I Am that my life took on
meaning. It could be argued that this awareness existed at my birth, and
this too would be accurate, since all births are meant to be eagerly
looked forward to as beginnings of I Am.  Since most births are seen in
this way, and most mature lives are not, we concentrate here on mature
lives. 

<sup>2.23</sup> My mature life thus began with the recognition of who I
Am, as does yours. This time was followed by my “example life,” a life
that began with the forty days and forty nights spent upon the mountain,
and continued with my joining with my brothers and sisters, with the
bringing of light to darkness, power to the powerless, health to the
sick, life to the dead. My life touched all those willing to be touched,
changed all those willing to be changed.  But great unwillingness
remained. Willingness was not yet upon humankind. The choice was made
collectively to remain in illusion. The choice for continued suffering
was made. And so I responded to that choice. An example of response was
needed. The example was that of a symbolic gesture. It, too, was a
choice. A choice to take all that suffering upon myself and kill it. To
say, here is what we will do with suffering. We will take it away once
and for all. We will crucify it upon the cross of time and space, bury
it, so that it need be no more, and demonstrate that new life follows
the choice to end suffering.  2.24“I” did not suffer, for I knew who I
was and chose no suffering.  This is what is meant by the idea that has
been repeated as “I died for your sins.” My death was meant to
demonstrate that the end of suffering had come, and with it, eternal
life. 

<sup>2.25</sup> Here, then, is where *you* need to make the choice that
those in my time could not make, the choice to end suffering. This is
the choice I made “for all.” This is a choice you make for all as well. 

<sup>2.26</sup> *Willingness* is now upon humankind. What my life
demonstrated but needs to be demonstrated anew. But this will not happen
if you cling to suffering. If you do not accept your Self, all of
yourself, you cling to suffering.  

<sup>2.27</sup> This is why you first needed to accept me. To accept me
is to accept the end of suffering. To accept the end of suffering is to
accept your true Self.

