---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "8"
title: "Day 8: Accept the Present"
---

<sup>8.1</sup> Some of you have felt, once again, a bit of
disappointment or resignation as a result of our dialogue concerning not
removing yourself from life. Your whole purpose in pursuing the course
of this dialogue may have been, at least subconsciously, the idea of
removing yourself from normal life. Even the conditions of the time of
acceptance may not have cheered you fully. Now, with the ideas of the
conditions of the time of acceptance fresh in your minds and hearts,
let’s return to that earlier discussion. 

<sup>8.2</sup> If you can’t remove yourself from life, what choice have
you but to join with it? Love it. Love yourself. Love yourself enough to
accept yourself. Love will transform normal, ordinary, life into
extraordinary life. Loving exactly who you are and where you are in
every moment is what will cause the transformation that will end your
*desire* to remove yourself from life. All those frustrations you
currently feel have a purpose: To move you through them and beyond
them—to acceptance. 

<sup>8.3</sup> But here is the point that needs clearing up. This is not
about acceptance of what you do not like. Do you really think you are
being called to accept “normal life?” Called to accept those conditions
that have made you feel unhappy? No! You are being called to an
acceptance of new conditions! 

<sup>8.4</sup> Realize that your desire for your life to be different,
your desire for your unhappiness to be gone, is very unlikely, in truth,
to stem from the details of your life. Even so, you are not called to
accept what you do not like, but to accept that you don’t like whatever
it is you don’t like. Then, and only then—when you have accepted how you
*feel*—can you respond truly. Only when you have accepted how you feel
do you quit labeling good or bad; only then can you deal with anything
from a place of peace. 

<sup>8.5</sup> Does accepting that you don’t like something cause a
judgment to occur? Do you judge peas if you do not like them? And yet,
do you not accept that you are at the mercy of situations of all kinds?
A job you do not like?  You may not like it, and you may say often that
you do not like it, but you may just as often say that you accept it.
You may, in fact, need a job that you do not like, but in acceptance of
the simple truth that you do not like your job, you have accepted your
Self and where you are now, rather than the external circumstance. We
are not, when talking of acceptance, talking of externals, but of
internals. We are not talking of the old adage or prayer that calls you
to “accept what you cannot change” but of acceptance—absolute,
unconditional, acceptance—of your Self. 

<sup>8.6</sup> Yet to state that you do not like your job is to
pre-judge your job, to assume that the conditions you did not like
yesterday will be the same today. 

<sup>8.7</sup> Now you may have been thinking—again, at least
subconsciously—that your “real” Self has no feelings of dislike, and in
this confusion have been “trying” and even “struggling” to accept what
you do not like in order to be more true to an ideal self. Yet this
ideal self is not the Self you are right now. You cannot accept only an
ideal self. This is nonsense. Can you not see this?  

<sup>8.8</sup> All power to effect change comes from acceptance—not
acceptance of the way *things* are, but acceptance of who *you* are *in
the present*. Not through acceptance of the way you want to be but of
the way you are now.  There will be many things within your life that
will take some time to change, but many others that can change instantly
through this radical acceptance. You will find, once you have begun to
practice acceptance of the present, that there will be far fewer things
you do not like, and that you will be shown, in the relationship you
have in the present, the response to those you still do. 

<sup>8.9</sup> Gossip would be an easy example.  Gossip goes on in many
environments. You are highly unlikely to like gossip, but you may have
felt that to say you do not like it is to judge it, or that to accept
what is, is to accept that people gossip. These false ideas about
acceptance may then have blocked your own true feelings and true
response. However, a simple acceptance that *you* do not like the gossip
taking place in a present moment situation, will enable you not to
participate, judge, or appear to accept that which you do not truly find
acceptable. 

<sup>8.10</sup> Not all situations will seem as easy as this example.
Acceptance does not require any specific action but it will lead to
action that is consistent with who you are when you are fully
comfortable in your acceptance of who you are. Understand, however, that
this eventual outcome will never occur without the initial acceptance.

<sup>8.11</sup> This acceptance is the only thing that will truly
prevent judgment, for it does not require you to be your brother’s
keeper but only your own. It requires you to know yourself without
judging yourself. 

<sup>8.12</sup> Will knowing your dislikes cause you to be intolerant?
This is an important question. You have been intolerant of yourself and
it was easy to extend this intolerance to others. Once acceptance of the
Self begins to be practiced, you will realize that the self of
intolerance was the self of fear. Acceptance of yourself, in love, leads
to acceptance of others.  Knowing this aspect of how you feel, what we
are here calling your dislikes, is but a first step in this beginning
stage of acceptance and only of importance because of your intolerance
of your own feelings.

<sup>8.13</sup> Remember that you have been told that your real Self
will be intolerant only of illusion and that this intolerance will take
the form of seeing only the truth rather than attempting to combat
illusion. Thus when you see others gossiping, you are called to see only
the truth of who they are—to see beyond the illusion, what would seem to
be the “fact” of their gossip—to the fear that feeds it, and beyond the
fear to the love that will dispel it. You are not called to walk away in
disgust, showing your righteous contempt for the actions of others, but
to accept who you are within the relationship of that present moment.

<sup>8.14</sup> Even this type of seeing will have remnants of
righteousness attached to it if you do not accept the feelings generated
by it. You may know that you dislike gossip only because you have been
both a participant and a victim of it. It may still call up feelings of
shame or irritation. It may even still intrigue you if you are
interested enough in the subject of the gossip. To walk away from
gossip, accepting that you do not like it without accepting the feelings
associated with it, will make of it a mental construct, a rule you have
set up for your new self to follow. If this becomes the case, you will
find yourself adhering to a standard rather than acting from who you
are. You will, in fact, have returned to judgment because you will have
made a predetermination, just as in saying you do not like your job, you
predetermine a continuing dislike. Soon, you might see a group of people
who often gossip and *assume* that they are gossiping rather than
observing the situation for what it is and responding in the present.

<sup>8.15</sup> If you replace the act of gossiping with a mental
construct or rule that says you do not tolerate it, then you will become
intolerant. And because you will then act from a predetermined standard
rather than feeling the feelings associated with gossip in the present
moment, you will soon find that a bit of gossip will crop up in your own
speech, couched as something else, something even worse than gossip. You
will sigh, and reference something someone said or did that but shows
that they are not yet as “advanced” as you, only revealing, through your
reference, that it is you who are not as “advanced” as you think you
are. 

<sup>8.16</sup> This is the importance now of accepting yourself in the
*present* and of understanding certainty. Certainty cannot be
predetermined, just as you cannot predetermine either your likes or
dislikes. Being aware of how you feel *in the present moment* is the
only way to certainty. Thus to say that you are certain that you do not
like gossip, or certain that you do not like your job, or even certain
that you do not like peas, is an inaccurate use of the term of
*certainty*. It may have been consistent with the term or word
*certainty* as it was used in the past, but you will not want to confuse
the *term* and the *condition*. You may think that taking away the type
of certainty associated with the “term” of certainty will cause you to
be even less certain than you were before.  You will be less certain in
your judgments and opinions, but this is highly appropriate and much
needed practice for true certainty. 

<sup>8.17</sup> We have talked little of feelings here, and there has
been a reason for this discussion coming so late in our time together.
To accept the feelings of the self of illusion would have been to accept
the feelings generated by the fear of the ego thought system or the
bitterness of your heart. It would have been to accept the feelings of a
personal self who had not yet unlearned the lessons of the past or taken
these steps toward elevation. Now, however, it is crucial that you come
to acceptance of yourself—in the present, as you are—for only by doing
so will you come to full *acceptance* of who you are and be able to
allow the Self of unity to merge with the self of form, thus elevating
the self of form. You will also, only in this way, come to true
expression of the elevated Self of form. Access and expression are both
conditions of the present. 

<sup>8.18</sup> Another error can occur if you deny your feelings in
favor of the perceived higher path to enlightenment. In denying your own
feelings you will tend also to deny the feelings of others. You will
think that you know the real from the unreal, truth from illusion, and
so will disregard the feelings of others as if they do not matter. This
will only happen if you allow yourself to deny and thus become distanced
from your own feelings. 

<sup>8.19</sup> Does this seem confusing? To be called to see only the
truth, to see beyond illusion, and then to be told to accept the
feelings of others? It should not. While true compassion sees only the
truth, this does not mean it holds the feelings of anyone—not those
living in truth, or those living in illusion—in disregard. This
disregard is a temptation of those who live in peace, a temptation
unlike the more pleasant temptations that were spoken of earlier. This
temptation stems from one thing only—from not living in the present.
Distancing, or non-acceptance of your own feelings, is not living in the
present and will create an attitude that will not be compassionate. This
is why we talk specifically here of dislikes. While you are prone to
acceptance of that which you “like,” to those feelings you think of as
“good” feelings, you are still prone to non-acceptance of that which you
do not like in yourself and others and even to, at times, the false
sense of certainty about your non-acceptance that we have spoken of.

<sup>8.20</sup> When you develop a false sense of certainty, you see not
the true Self and the holiness of the true Self being expressed in the
feelings of a present moment situation, but see a future where the true
Self will be more evolved, evolved enough not to feel the anger or hurt,
the bitterness or guilt that you do not like. You hold others to the
“standards” you hold for yourself, thus the only “standard” that is
consistent with the time of acceptance is that *of* acceptance. 

<sup>8.21</sup> Now you must realize that you no longer have cause to
fear your feelings.  They will no longer be the source of the
misdirection of the past *if* you accept your feelings in present time
and begin to be aware of your natural ability to respond truly *because*
you have accepted your feelings in present time. This is a recognition
that by being in the present you know your feelings are of the truth.
This is certainty. This is all that will prevent you from “reacting” to
feelings out of your previous pattern. 

<sup>8.22</sup> If anger arises in you now, it does not mean that you
will react in whatever way anger once called you to react and it does
not mean that something is wrong with you or that you are not spiritual
enough! It simply means that you are involved in a situation or
relationship that has called forth that feeling. It is in the expression
of that feeling that who you are is revealed, not in the feeling itself.
The feeling is provided by the body, a helpmate now in your service as a
route to true expression. 

<sup>8.23</sup> Remember always that we work now to unite the Self of
union with the self of form. The self of form cannot be denied now. This
is a continuation of the reversal of some of the ideas of yourself that
began in “A Treatise on the New”. 

<sup>8.24</sup> Let me repeat a passage from that Treatise here, a
passage about the power to observe what is. “It is not about observing a
potential for what could be if your brother or sister would just follow
in the way that has been shown to you. It is about observing what is.
The power to observe what is, is what will keep you unified with your
brothers and sisters rather than separating you from them. There is no
power without this unity. You cannot see ‘others’ as other than who they
are and know your power.”

<sup>8.25</sup> Non-acceptance in any form is separating. 

<sup>8.26</sup> The very idea of potential, you may recall, is a product
of the ego thought system that would keep your true Self hidden. You are
used to hiding the self of the past about whom you are not well pleased,
and you are used to hiding the self of potential, the future self you
think you can only dream of being. The ego-self was the self you felt
safe presenting to the world, the self you believed the world would find
acceptable. If you are still presenting this self, you are still in a
state of non-acceptance and whatever peace you are feeling will not
last. Whatever access to unity you have experienced will not last
because you will not be choosing the time of acceptance. 

<sup>8.27</sup> I have called this time both the time of unity and the
time of acceptance because you cannot only focus on unity when you are
still in need of this full acceptance or you will not reach the place of
sustainability. Every situation and every feeling that you do not like
will pull you from union toward separation. All feelings of
non-acceptance lead to a feeling of needing to learn “how to” reach
acceptance of that which you do not like, or “how to” create a situation
that you will like. It is the bypassing of this “how to” function—a
function of the time of learning—that we are heading toward. 

<sup>8.28</sup> Realize how freeing it will be to not go through the
gyrations of attempting to figure out “how to” reach acceptance of what
you do not like! How freeing it will be to realize you have no need to
do this! How freeing it will be to accept all of your feelings and not
to puzzle over which are true and which are false! To realize that you
no longer have false feelings. That your feelings are not misleading you
but supporting you!  That they are but calling you to expression of your
true Self! To true representation of who you are—who you are now! 

<sup>8.29</sup> Remove all thinking that says that you can err in
following your feelings. This is the thinking of the old thought system,
not the new.  This is thinking comprised of the time-delay of the time
of learning—of a time when you used your feelings, opinions, and
judgments interchangeably and either “thought” about them in order to
know how to react or suffered the consequences of reacting without
“thought.” Judgment has been left behind and with it the need for
opinions and for “thinking” about “how to” react. Reaction has been
replaced by response, calculated mental constructs have been replaced
with true expression. It does not seem so only if you have not allowed
yourself to enjoy the freedom of the new, the freedom of being your true
Self. 

<sup>8.30</sup> I call you now to embrace this freedom.

