---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "6"
title: "Day 6: The Time In Between"
---

<sup>6.1</sup> We now will discuss *being* the true Self while becoming
the true Self—the time in between your awareness of and access to
Christ-consciousness, or unity, and your sustainability of
Christ-consciousness, or unity, in form. As was said earlier: To realize
the state of becoming is to realize that an in-between exists between
the time of learning and the time of being the elevated Self of form.
This is what our time on this holy mountain is largely comprised of. We
are in an in-between state of time. We stand at the intersection point
of the finite and the infinite in order to complete the creative act of
becoming. 

<sup>6.2</sup> While you know this is the focus of our time together,
few, if any of you, feel as if you have truly taken leave of the
everyday world of your “normal” existence and feel fully present on the
holy mountain.  This is not a second-best situation. Although it is
being handled in this way partially because to ask you to walk away from
your “normal” life for forty days and forty nights would cause too much
anxiety and exclude too many, this is not the only, or even the major
reason for this chosen method. 

<sup>6.3</sup> Before we can continue to expand on your awareness of the
difference you have chosen, we thus must address this time so that any
confusion it seems to be causing will not delay your progress. 

<sup>6.4</sup> Since we have often discussed the similarity between the
creation of art and the work we are doing here, we will return to this
example. We have spoken of becoming as the time of movement, being, and
expression coming together. We have further spoken of your point of
access to unity as one of convergence, intersection, and pass-through.
Can you see the similarities between these actions despite the
difference in language used? 

<sup>6.5</sup> Movement, Being, Expression; Convergence, Intersection,
Pass-through. 

<sup>6.6</sup> How might these things be linked to the example of
creating art? I choose this particular example to address this
particular time of being in-between. Let us consider the creation of a
piece of music. The creation of a piece of music, like the creation of a
painting or a poem, takes place in stages. 

<sup>6.7</sup> At one time the creation of a piece of music is only an
idea in the mind and heart of the creator. The creation of a song or a
symphony may begin as simply as with a few notes “running through the
mind” or a particular turn of phrase that inspires the creator to see
these words as lyrics. At some point after this gestation within the
mind and heart, the artist puts pen to paper, or picks up a guitar, or
sings into a tape recorder. Much starting and stopping may be done, or
the piece may find its expression easily, in a way that the artist might
describe as flowing. Depending on the disposition of the artist, the
piece of music might be shared with others at each step of the process,
or only late in its development. But at some point, the sharing will
take place, and the reactions of those with whom the music is shared
will impact the artist and the piece.  Positive reactions might validate
the artist’s instinct and encourage even more boldness. Negative
reactions might cause the artist to doubt her instincts, to make
changes, or to be more determined than ever to see the piece through to
the point where it will be appreciated.  Finishing touches will be put
on the piece. Some collaboration might take place to get it just right.
By the time the artist has completed the piece of music she began, it
may have little resemblance to the piece originally intended, or it
might be quite true to the original idea. 

<sup>6.8</sup> Every creative piece of art that comes to completion
includes a choice. At some point along the way a commitment is made
between the artist and the piece of art. A commitment to see it through.
This commitment may come because the artist knows it is “good enough” to
deserve the time and attention, or the commitment may come as a
recognition that a relationship of love has developed, and “good enough”
or not, completion is necessary. It may even be a commitment simply to
practice, with the artist feeling no certainty about the value of the
piece, but determining to see the project through, knowing that it will
make the next piece or the next a better piece of music. 

<sup>6.9</sup> In all stages of its creation, the piece of music exists
in relationship to its creator. Be it only an idea, a partially
completed rhythm, lyrics without notes, or a completed work that will
qualify more as practice than as art, the piece exists. In each stage of
creation it is what it is. Only when it is a complete, and full, and
true expression of the artist’s idea, however, will it and the artist be
one. 

<sup>6.10</sup> You are a work of art headed for this oneness of full
and true expression. No stage you pass through to reach this oneness is
without value. Each stage contains the perfection of that stage. Each
stage contains the whole and each whole contains each stage. 

<sup>6.11</sup> You have been told you are in the final stage of
becoming. You have committed to completion of the becoming that will
create oneness between Creator and created. You have developed the
creative relationship that is union. You are *in* and *within* the
movement of the creative process where there is no distinction between
Creator and created. You are being who you are right now and eliciting
the expression that will take you to the final stage of being who you
will be in oneness. 

<sup>6.12</sup> You are not separate now from who you will be when you
reach completion! You are *in* and *within* the relationship of creation
in which created and Creator become one.

<sup>6.13</sup> Now, in returning to one of the main themes of this
chapter—the simple truth that you are having to go about this creative
process while remaining embroiled in daily life—I want to acknowledge
the difficulty some of you will seem to be experiencing even while
pointing out to you that *life is life*. 

<sup>6.14</sup> Let’s begin with the seeming difficulty. It may take on
many forms, but its main source is almost surely a desire to focus on
the relationship developing between us, and a corresponding desire not
to have to focus on the details of daily life. You may be thinking that
the ease so often spoken of in our conversations would be there *if
only* you could be truly “taken away” from it all and experience nothing
but our relationship, focus on nothing but your point of access, have a
chance to really begin to invite abundance without having to look at the
bills that arrive by daily mail or worry about the many other aspects of
your simple survival.  

<sup>6.15</sup> Yet realize that if you were told to leave these worries
behind and get away from it all, you would likely rebel and find many
reasons not to make it so. And so, abundance will have to come first,
lack of cause for worry will have to come first, an ability to focus on
other than daily life will have to come first. These are what these
continuing dialogues will facilitate. 

<sup>6.16</sup> They will facilitate this by facilitating the acceptance
of life as it is. This is why this dialogue is occurring on the holy
mountain *without* taking you away from life as you know it. We are,
after all, speaking of the elevation of the Self of form. This elevation
must occur in life, in *your* life *as it is*, rather than in some
idealized situation *away* from what you consider normal life. 

<sup>6.17</sup> This does not, however, mean that this elevation can be
postponed, put off, or can wait for some convenient time. Quite the
contrary. We are having our dialogue on the holy mountain while you
remain within your life for the very purpose of not allowing this to
happen. 

<sup>6.18</sup> It also does not mean that many of you will not have
changed or will be changing the very fabric of your daily life. Changes
you feel called to make are not discouraged here. The point being made
is simply that removal from life is not possible or desirable. 

<sup>6.19</sup> Learning takes the student away from “normal” life and
creates a place for teaching and only calls this place elevated.
Awareness, acceptance, and discovery cannot occur in a place set apart
from “normal” life. Believe me when I tell you that the elevation you
are currently experiencing is the only elevation you would want. *As
within, so without* is the operative phrase here. It is not the other
way around.  You cannot find a place outside of yourself that will allow
for the elevation of which we speak. There are no hallowed halls of
learning that will accomplish this. There is no mountain top in any
location on Earth that can accomplish this. It is only the relationship
we are developing in this elevated place *within* that will bring to
your full realization and manifestation *without* the accomplishment
that already exists. 

<sup>6.20</sup> I know it doesn’t always seem so. Give your attention
for a moment to the temptations associated with the mountain top of my
own experience. They were temptations of the world, of the normal, daily
life of my time. They were attempts to distract me from my purpose, to
change my focus, to engage me in debate, to lure me from the place of
elevation I knew I had attained. The temptations of the human experience
are the same now as they were then. They are the same on the mountain
top as they are on level ground. A “place” that seems externally removed
from them cannot remove them. Only a created place within can do so.

<sup>6.21</sup> This place within is what we are creating here. It is a
truly elevated place. It is as real as a mountain top, in fact much more
real.  Were your scientists to know what to look for, they would find
it. It is being created to exist both within the body and beyond the
body. It is, in truth, the portal of access we have spoken of, a
connection with the state of union as real as if a tether were stretched
from here to there.

<sup>6.22</sup> The point here, however, is this: Quit trying to remove
yourself from life! If this were required it would be done! Think not
that I cannot arrange the ideal environment for our dialogue. This is
it!

<sup>6.23</sup> Think a moment about a new job or some other endeavor in
which you apprenticed. In such a situation a person is taught and shown
the skills and activities needed for the accomplishment of the tasks he
or she is to perform. But often it is only when the teacher steps aside,
and the apprentice is able to gain experience, that the apprentice is in
a position to be able to begin to perform with any certainty. Even
learning is accelerated by hands-on activities, by *doing* what one has
previously only learned. 

<sup>6.24</sup> You have done your learning and your teacher has stepped
aside as a teacher and become a companion. Would you desire to prolong
your time as an apprentice by being removed from the performance of your
tasks?  Perhaps you would. But as has been stated from the beginning,
there is an urgency to your task. 

<sup>6.25</sup> Thinking of our relationship as that of colleagues as
well as companions, as fellow workers or work-mates with a task to
accomplish, as well as conversationalists, is not an erroneous way to
think of our relationship. We are both friends and co-workers.
Colleagues as well as companions. 

<sup>6.26</sup> Our dialogue is not without purpose. You know this or
you would not be here. You know this or you would not feel the devotion
to me and to what we do here that you do. And what’s more, you feel the
eagerness of your brothers and sisters. If you felt our goal was
unlikely to be accomplished, or that it would elevate only a few and
leave all others behind, you would not feel this devotion. You know our
task is holy and incomparable. You know there is nothing more important
for you to be involved in. All other areas where you might previously
have placed your devotion pale in comparison to our task. 

<sup>6.27</sup> As your belief grows in our ability to accomplish
together our given task, you are almost surely feeling this devotion
extend to others, particularly those who, along with us, work toward its
accomplishment. In doing so you are not creating new special
relationships but the true devotion that will replace special
relationships forever. 

<sup>6.28</sup> But this very knowing of the sanctity and
incomparability of our task is what seems to create the difficulty so
many of you are currently experiencing in one way or another. Your
desire is where it belongs—here—in the passionate acceptance of our work
together. And so the lack of desire you are experiencing for other areas
of the life you still seem so deeply involved in is disturbing to you.
Yet why should this be disturbing? Why should you continue to desire the
life you have had? 

<sup>6.29</sup> Now let’s address this seeming paradox. You have been
told to do only what you can feel peaceful doing, to do only what allows
you to be yourself, and yet here are you told not to try to remove
yourself from life. 

<sup>6.30</sup> Do you need to feel desire for what you do in order to
do it peacefully? Do you need to be other than yourself in order to
navigate your daily life?  What you are being shown here is that you do
not. What you are going to realize from this time of seeming difficulty
is an end to difficulty and the growth of your ability to do whatever
you do peacefully and to be who you are in any situation in which you
find yourself. There is no time to wait while you learn, or think you
learn, the qualities that will allow this. This is the point of
movement, being, and expression coming together. The point of
convergence, intersection, and pass-through. This is it! Right here in
your life as it is right now.

<sup>6.31</sup> There is, thus, no call to be discouraged. This is not
delay, but what you might think of as trial by fire. Be encouraged
rather than discouraged that you are able to embrace this dialogue and
remain in your life. Realize that this is just what we work toward! This
difficulty will pass through you as you allow for and accept where you
are right now and who you are right now. 

<sup>6.32</sup> Does this work of acceptance seem never ending? It is
until it is replaced by reverence, just as learning was unending until
it was replaced by acceptance. The conditions, however, of this time of
acceptance are not the conditions of the time of learning, and so you
will soon see that the difficulty of the time of learning truly is
behind you. 

<sup>6.33</sup> Let us speak now of the conditions of the time of
acceptance, for these will cheer you.

