---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "9"
title: "Day 9: Freedom"
---

<sup>9.1</sup> Freedom from want, freedom from lack, freedom from
repression, are what we will now enjoy together on our mountain top
retreat. We have not removed ourselves from life in any way, and yet we
have reached a place of retreat, a place of safety and of rest, a place
away from “normal” life and the lack of freedom you have experienced
there. I am your refuge from the past, your gate of entry to the
present. You have fled the foreign land, where freedom was merely an
illusion, and arrived at the Promised Land, the land of our inheritance. 

<sup>9.2</sup> Allow yourself, now, to experience your arrival, your
return to your true home, your return to your Self. Laugh. Cry. Shout or
wail. Dance and sing. Spin a new web.  The web of freedom. 

<sup>9.3</sup> In other words, express your Self! 

<sup>9.4</sup> You who do not feel confident in your feelings, who do
not feel confident in your ability to respond, who do not as yet feel
the freedom of the new, allow yourself now, to do so. Allow freedom to
reign, for it is your allowance, your choice, your permission, that will
make it so.  The only one who can stop you now is yourself. The only
permission you ever needed was your own. 

<sup>9.5</sup> We will practice here to build your confidence, a
confidence sorely lacking. What confidence is it of which we speak?  The
confidence to be yourself. This confidence is what must precede true
certainty in this time of elevation of the self of form. The certainty
that arises from unity is different from this confidence in the self of
form and they must be realized together for the elevation of the self of
form to take place. What good will be the certainty of unity if the self
of form has no confidence in its ability to express it? *Expression* of
the certainty of unity is what the elevated Self of form is all about.
Certainty of mind and heart has been realized by many. The *expression*
of that certainty in form has not. 

<sup>9.6</sup> Freedom is nothing other than freedom of expression. No
one can block the freedom of what your mind would think or heart would
feel. But take away the ability to express what the mind would think or
heart would feel, and freedom is no more. Yet it is not an outward
source that you must fear or protect your freedom against. It is none
other than yourself who has not allowed you the freedom of expression. 

<sup>9.7</sup> Realize now the truth of what you have just heard. While
you know you have not allowed yourself freedom of expression, you
believe you have allowed yourself freedom of thought.  You believe you
have allowed yourself freedom of feeling. And yet if the truth be
admitted, you know that even this is not quite true. You know that you
censor your own thoughts and feelings, accepting some and not others.
You know you have repressed your emotions. You know you have lived in a
state in which you believed yourself to be lacking. You know you have
never known freedom from want.  

<sup>9.8</sup> Today, I would like you to know freedom. 

<sup>9.9</sup> Let’s begin this day with a consideration of the idea
that you may have an inaccurate idea of an ideal self. 

<sup>9.10</sup> Where might your notion of what an ideal self is have
come from? It may have come from your ideas of right and wrong, good and
bad. It may have its source in your religious beliefs. It may have come
from someone you have idolized, someone you believe to be the spiritual
titan you still but hope to be. Your image of an ideal self may have
sprung from your reading, from descriptions of those the world has come
to see as enlightened ones. It may be linked to your ideas of being able
to express wisdom or compassion. The image of the ideal self you hold in
your mind, no matter what form it takes, is still an image, and must now
be done without if you are going to realize freedom. 

<sup>9.11</sup> As was said earlier, all of your images are false
images. Isn’t it possible that none are more false than this image of an
ideal self? Not having false idols is an ancient commandment. An ideal
image *is* an idol.  It is symbolic rather than real. It has form only
within your mind and has no substance. To work toward, or to have as a
goal, the achievement of an ideal image is to have created a false god. 

<sup>9.12</sup> Realize now that your ideal image, no matter how it was
formed, is a product of the time of learning. It became an image in your
mind, and maybe even within your heart, through the process of learning.
It arose from the learning of right from wrong, good from bad. It arose
from the learning of moral and religious beliefs. It arose from
comparison. It arose from seeking. It arose from your perception of
lack. 

<sup>9.13</sup> This ideal image is intimately related with the time of
learning in another way as well. It is the epitome of learning, what you
have seen learning as being *for*. While other learning goals may have
receded, this one seems a learning goal worthy of your *effort*. It
seems to be a true goal amidst many illusory goals. Just as you may have
believed that if you worked hard enough you would achieve a position of
status within your profession or material wealth, you have believed that
if you work hard enough you can maybe, someday, if you are blessed or
lucky, achieve this ideal image. 

<sup>9.14</sup> But this ideal image is as much a product of illusion as
have been all of your worldly goals. 

<sup>9.15</sup> As with most goals of the time of learning, it was an
ego-centered goal, a carrot of fulfillment the ego but dangled before
you in the place it called the future. As with all messages of the ego,
it but says that who you are is not good enough. 

<sup>9.16</sup> The idea of your “potential” was a useful learning tool
and one that served the purposes of the Holy Spirit as well as those of
the ego.  The idea of your “potential” and your ability to be “more”
than what your limited view of yourself would have you be, was a
necessary tool to call you to the learning that would return you to your
true identity.  But the time for such tools is over. 

<sup>9.17</sup> How will you ever realize, or make real, the Self you
are when you strive to be something else? Just as “finding” brought
“seeking” to an end, accomplishment brings striving to an end.

<sup>9.18</sup> An idealized image, like a rule, is a mental construct.
All mental constructs are predeterminations. 

<sup>9.19</sup> All ideas such as those of advancement or enlightenment
are mental constructs. They are predeterminations. 

<sup>9.20</sup> While language cannot be completely stripped of usages
such as these, and while some use of similar terms, like our use of the
term elevated, are still necessary, it is only in your understanding
that our use of these terms is not a cause for predetermination that we
can proceed. For if you believe that we are proceeding to some
predetermined ideal state, we will not succeed in the work we are doing
here together.  For if you believe this, you will not accept your Self
as you are. If you do not accept your Self as you are, you will not move
from image to presence. If you do not move from image to presence you
will never realize your freedom. If you do not realize your freedom, you
will not realize your power. 

<sup>9.21</sup> To *represent* an image is to *become* an image. To
become an image, even an idealized image, is to still become a false
idol or even what is referred to in more common usage as a spiritual
leader or guru. True spiritual leaders or gurus have no need nor desire
to be seen as such and are often made into images such as these only
within the minds of those who would seek to follow their teachings. This
desire of “followers” to accept an image is less prevalent now but still
a common danger. 

<sup>9.22</sup> What an image does is separate. The holder of an image,
precisely because he or she holds an image as a goal, holds him or
herself separate. They realize not that they are the same as the one
they idolize, but realize only that they are different. In “wanting” to
be the same and not realizing sameness, they fail to celebrate their own
difference and do not bring the gift of their sameness, or of their
difference, to the world, but hold it in waiting for such a time as the
ideal is reached. 

<sup>9.23</sup> You are the “same” or “as” accomplished as every
enlightened one who has ever existed.  Without realizing this, however,
your unique expression of your accomplishment will not be realized. 

<sup>9.24</sup> Your freedom is contingent upon your ability to give up
your images, particularly the image you hold of an ideal self. It is
contingent upon your ability to accept that you are your ideal self.
Yes, even right now, with all your seeming imperfections. 

<sup>9.25</sup> What are these imperfections but your “differences?”
Have we not spoken of these differences as givens, as gifts? These are
not just the givens of talents or inspired ideas, but all the givens
that combined create the wholeness and the holiness of who you are. A
Creator who desired only sameness would not have created a world of such
diversity.  You are a creator who created this diversity. It was and is
a choice meant to release the beauty of expression in all its forms. You
have a *given* form that is perfect for your expression of the beauty
and truth of who you are. You cannot express the beauty and truth of who
another is. You cannot express the beauty and truth of a future self.
You can only express the beauty and truth of who you are now, in the
present.  And you do. You just have not realized that you do. You have
not desired to do so but desired to do something else! Desired to wait,
desired to learn, desired to imitate. 

<sup>9.26</sup> What might happen if you change what you desire? You
might just realize your freedom.

<sup>9.27</sup> Nothing, not even the ego, has been able to keep you
from expressing the beauty and truth of who you are. You came into the
world of form incapable of not expressing the beauty and truth of who
you are.  That you are *is* an expression of beauty and truth. You
express the beauty and truth of who you are by being alive. It has only
been your inability to accept this that has caused your grief and
pretensions. In a certain sense, your ability to express the beauty and
truth of who you are has been taught out of you by learning practices
that sought for sameness, and saw not your differences as the gifts they
are. 

<sup>9.28</sup> All of these learning practices were the product of
false images of the way things—and *you*—should be! Can you not see the
extreme urgency of not perpetuating such a practice? 

<sup>9.29</sup> All you need do is look at a young child to see the joy,
beauty, and truth of expression. You, too, were once a young child. You
are still the same self you were then. You are, however, a self in whom
the freedom of expression has been diminished.  Diminished, but not
extinguished. 

<sup>9.30</sup> Now we must return to you the freedom and the *will* to
fan the flames of your desire to be, and to express, who you are in
truth. 

<sup>9.31</sup> Thus you can see that a key step in doing this is the
debunking of the myth of an ideal self. An ideal self, like a god seen
as “other than” puts all that you would long for in a place outside of,
or beyond, the Self you are now. 

<sup>9.32</sup> You might ask here what is wrong with desiring to have
the freedom to strive to be more and to do more. You might ask what life
would be *for* without this type of freedom to strive, to achieve, to
accomplish, to work toward and realize goals. This is the second myth
that must be shattered if you are to know true freedom. It begins with
the simple realization that you do still *desire*, or *think* you
desire, learning challenges of this type and with the realization that
this is all these are—learning challenges. You seek learning challenges
now only because of the consistency with which you did so in the past.
In the past you moved quickly from one learning challenge to another.
You have just completed a monumental learning challenge and so your
natural pattern would be to keep going now, to use the momentum of this
learning success to achieve another. 

<sup>9.33</sup> This pattern will be easily replaced, however, as your
acceptance of yourself as you are, the *real* challenge of this time,
begins to grow and to build your confidence. Unity and your access to
unity will be your certainty.  Trust in your own abilities—the abilities
of the self of form joined with the Self of union—will be your
confidence. Only these *combined* abilities will release your power.

