---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "18"
title: "Day 18: The Way to Paradise"
---

<sup>18.1</sup> You have been preparing for this final stage of the
fulfillment of the way of Jesus. You have also been preparing for the
beginning of the fulfillment of the way of Mary. Many of you will follow
the way of Jesus to completion, beginning a stage of interaction with
the world, an interaction with the miracles that will aid in the
dismantling of the old and with preparing the way for the birth of the
new. Others of you will follow your hearts to a bypassing of the final
stage of the old and to anchoring the new within the web of reality.
Still others will participate in both, following their innate desire to
facilitate the creation of change through a specific function even while
moving into the new as they do so. Each way is as needed now as it was
two thousand years ago. 

<sup>18.2</sup> One way is active. One way is receptive. Yet the ways
are not separate any more than Jesus was separate from Mary—or any
mother separate from her child. The ways are rather complementary and
symbiotic. Together they return wholeness and will bring about the
completion of the time of Christ. This symbiotic working together will
be essential for the birth of the new and in truth symbolizes it in form
and process. As within, so without. Mary represents the relationship
that occurs within, Jesus the relationship that occurs with the world.
So do each of you. These two ways also represent God and
Christ-consciousness, the extension of God. God is everything in heaven
and on earth and is in everything in heaven and on earth. Thus, God
represents the world without. Christ-consciousness is God within *you*,
your particular manifestation of God and relationship with the God
within. 

<sup>18.3</sup> As has been said, the time of teaching and learning is
over.  If the way of Jesus was a way of acceptance, teaching, learning,
and leading an example life, then the remaining ways of Jesus that are
still applicable and appropriate in this final period are those of
acceptance and of being an example life. 

<sup>18.4</sup> Only those who have fully accepted who they are, are
capable of being example lives. These example lives are evidenced
through the individuation of the One Self among the many. In other
words, to choose to be an example life is to choose to be made known by,
and to, the many. It is full acceptance of the Self in a form that can
be distinguished, or individuated from the rest. It is full acceptance
of difference as well as sameness and of the necessity of each. It is a
choice many will be called to so that sameness is seen in difference,
the one is seen in the many, and the many seen in the one.  It is a way
of service through action. It is a way of joy and harmony for only
through joy and harmony can true service become true action. It is the
way for those who desire to bring expression to a calling they feel
within to “do” something. It is the way for those whose fulfillment and
completion is interlaced with bringing this expression to fulfillment.
If the call is there, the need is there. Have no question in your mind
about this. The universe is comprised of no superfluous elements. What
you feel called to is needed. 

<sup>18.5</sup> To be an example life is to be what you represent in
truth.  Followers of all faiths are called to example lives and to
representation of the same truth. All faith is faith in the unknown
through knowing, as a glimpse of fleeting light in darkness provides for
a knowing of light. Those who accept completion of the way of Jesus
accept their power to be generators of light in darkness without judging
or expelling darkness. They accept their power to represent both the
known and the unknown and to reveal the unknown through the known. They
accept the death of the self and the resurrection of the One Self, the
end of the individual and the individuation of the One Self amongst the
many. They find renewed pleasure in being who they are because they have
been renewed through resurrection. They follow the calling of their
hearts without attachment to previous concerns, for in their renewal
they fully realize the necessity of what can be given only through
expression of what is within them. They realize that what is needed now
is needed in order to renew or resurrect the world and all who abide
within it. 

<sup>18.6</sup> Resurrection lays aside death’s claim and with it the
claim of all that is temporary.  This is why we have spent time on the
idea of sickness and other unwanted states as temporary manifestations.
Your separated state *was* a sickness, an unwanted state, and thus a
temporary manifestation. The joining of mind and heart provided reunion
of the human and divine and thus accomplished the resurrection of the
eternal in form. Your virgin state, the state unaltered by the
separation, has been returned. 

<sup>18.7</sup> The truth represented by Jesus and Mary was represented
as a visual pattern that would aid understanding of the invisible. This
is what you are now called to do. Whether you demonstrate the myth of
duality or the truth of union, you are demonstrating the same thing. The
*way* in which you do this must be chosen, and for this choice to be
made with full consciousness, you must rely on your feelings. 

<sup>18.8</sup> Feelings are your awareness of the present and thus of
the truth.  They are your means of coming to know. They arise from
Christ-consciousness. They come not in response but as creations. Often
science and religion have puzzled over the “beginning” of life, over
what *causes* the formation of life, over what tells the brain what to
do, over the organizing factor of DNA, of tissues and cells that do know
exactly how to interact. Where does this knowing come from? When
something appears to go wrong, what is the source of the malfunction? 

<sup>18.9</sup> You have been told that although you believed yourself
to be separate this separation never actually occurred and that you have
always been the accomplished. If this had not been true, the cause of
life would not have been a cause of truth. Just as neither brain nor
heart alone provide for a functioning body, mind and heart in separation
could not truly exist and allow for a functioning state of life or
consciousness. Thus there was only a degree of separation that was able
to occur to allow for a certain type of experience. Now a new degree of
union is occurring to allow for a new type of experience. 

<sup>18.10</sup> The new visual pattern is that of spirit resurrected in
form. It is the ascension of the body, or elevation of the Self of form.
You are called to demonstrate this pattern. The choice is to demonstrate
this pattern through interaction with the world, or through incarnation
through relationship. Neither is exclusive. Both are contained within
the other. But the way of discovery and demonstration is different. 

<sup>18.11</sup> You are called to demonstrate this new visual pattern.
What is meant here by the word *demonstrate*, is to show your feelings,
to make them visible. They are the creations unique to you through your
interaction with the Christ-consciousness that abides within you. One
*way* of doing this is through individuation and becoming known. One
*way* of doing this is incarnation through relationship in which the
relationship, rather than the individuated Self, becomes the known. Both
ways are ways of creation. When feelings are shown, or made visible, the
new is created. This has always been the way of creation.  Each blade of
grass, each flower, each stone, is a creation of feelings.  All you need
do is look about you to know that feelings of love still abound. Beauty
still reigns. 

<sup>18.12</sup> Both the Self and the relationship of Self to all must
become known in order for the paradise that has been re-found to be
recreated for everyone. What else would life be for but to make the
invisible paradise of love visible and livable for all?

