---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "11"
title: "Day 11 Christ-Consciousness"
---

<sup>11.1</sup> We are One Self. How else could we be capable of
receiving what we give? How else could our lives be capable of
experiencing no loss but only gain? Why else would we have to share
ourselves to know ourselves?

<sup>11.2</sup> Because we are one heart, one mind, One Self, we can
only know our selves through sharing in unity and relationship. We could
only share in unity and relationship through a seeming separation from
the oneness in which we exist. This is the great paradox that unites the
world of form and the world of spirit, the world of separation with the
world of union, even while it does not unite the world of illusion with
the world of truth. Sharing in unity and relationship is the way and the
means to see past the world of illusion to the truth of the union of
form and spirit, separate selves and the One Self. 

<sup>11.3</sup> The elevation of the self of form is nothing but the
recognition of the One Self within the Self.

<sup>11.4</sup> The One Self exists within the many in order to know Its
Self through sharing in union and relationship. 

<sup>11.5</sup> All the benefits you might want to bring to the world
are brought about in only one way: The way of sharing in union and
relationship. It is only in relationship that the oneness of the Self
separates from oneness and so knows oneness. It is only through the
means of separate relationships joining in union that the One Self is
capable of being either the observer or the observed. This is as true of
God as it is of the self of form. God is the oneness and the separation.
Life is the relationship. God is what is. Life is the relationship of
what is with Its Self. 

<sup>11.6</sup> Separation, of itself, is nothing. What is separate
*and* joined in relationship is All because it is all that is knowable.
The All of Everything cannot be known any more than can nothingness. The
All of Everything is unknowable. Thus you are the knowable of God. You
are the knowable because you are the relationship of All with Its Self.
Separation is as unknowable as the All of Everything. To be separate in
truth would be to not exist. To be the All of Everything would be to not
know existence.  Only what exists in relationship knows that it exists.
Thus relationship is everything. Relationship is the truth. Relationship
is consciousness.

<sup>11.7</sup> Christ-consciousness is the awareness of existence
through relationship. It is not God. It is not man. It is the
relationship that allows the awareness that God is everything. It has
been called wisdom, Sophia, spirit. It is that without which God would
not know God. It is that which differentiates all from nothing. Because
it is that which differentiates, it is that which has taken form as well
as that from which form arose. It is the expression of oneness in
relationship with Its Self. 

<sup>11.8</sup> Life is the connecting tissue of the web of form with
the divine All. Life is consciousness. Christ-consciousness is awareness
of what is. It is the awareness of connection and relationship of All to
All. It is the merging of the unknowable and the knowable through
movement, expression, and being.

