---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "17"
title: "Day 17: The Fulfillment of the Way of Jesus"
---

<sup>17.1</sup> Just as the creation story had to start somewhere—so you
had to start somewhere. We have spoken of the spirit that animated all
things as the movement or cause of movement that began the creation
story. We have spoken of Christ-consciousness as the awareness of
existence through relationship. We have spoken of life-consciousness and
Christ-consciousness as the merging of the human and the divine into
observable form. Thus there must be a difference between
life-consciousness and Christ-consciousness, since you have been
life-conscious without being Christ-conscious. You have been the created
without being the creator. Something has been missing. What is Christ?
What is Christ-consciousness? Are they different or the same? 

<sup>17.2</sup> You have been told Christ-consciousness is neither God
nor man but the relationship that allows the awareness that God is
everything. You have been told Christ-consciousness has also been known
as wisdom, Sophia, spirit. Christ-consciousness thus obviously predates
the man Jesus, and creation itself. It is both the feminine and
masculine, the “identity” of God, or in other words, the All of All
given an identity.  God holds you within Himself. Christ is held within
you as the center or heart of yourself—as your identity and God’s
identity. Christ is the “I Am” of God, the expression of “I Am” in form,
the animator and the animated, the informer and the informed, the
movement, being, and expression of creation. Christ is that which
anointed form with the “I Am” of God. In many religious traditions, life
is ritually or sacramentally anointed in its coming and its going in
remembrance of the original anointing.

<sup>17.3</sup> Why do we return to this now, repeating what has been
said before?  Because we have reached the time, once again, for you to
claim your identity. Although being who you are has been discussed in
many ways, many of you still await being different than who you are.
This is because you realize that being your true Self is being in union,
undivided and inseparable from God, the All of All. God is only the
all-knowing because God is in everything and everyone. Consciousness
itself is not knowing but awareness. God is the Creator of knowing
because God created a means of coming to know. This “part” of God, the
animator and informer, is Christ-consciousness. 

<sup>17.4</sup> What is the drive that kept you reading this Course,
caused you to enter this dialogue, kept you examining, kept you
attempting to move beyond learning to a new means of knowing?
Christ-consciousness. This is why it was said in the beginning pages of
the Course that the Christ in you was the learner.  The Christ in you is
what was created to inspire movement beyond simple awareness to knowing.
You have always been aware that you exist and always been in search of
an answer as to why you exist. You have always been aware of the world
around you and always been in search of answers to what the world around
you is all about. An approach to knowing, which was called learning, was
previously the predominant approach. As this approach became more and
more centered in the mind and more and more about coming to know what
others had already learned and were capable of teaching, learning began
to fail the cause of knowing. 

<sup>17.5</sup> There have always been individuals who challenged the
predominant patterns of learning because of the strength of their
connection to Christ-consciousness. While no one has more access to
Christ-consciousness than another, some exhibited more willingness to
let that consciousness be their guiding force—that by which their being
gained movement and expression. Those like Jesus, who fully expressed
Christ-consciousness in form, did so as individuals, by not negating
their being as they realized this connection. Many others with
realization of Christ-consciousness as strong as that of the man, Jesus,
did not express that realization but negated the individual in favor of
the “spiritual.” 

<sup>17.6</sup> This is why we return now to your identity and the
individuation of your identity. 

<sup>17.7</sup> Christ-consciousness is not the second coming of Christ
but the first coming—the movement of being into form. This being was
fully expressed by Jesus Christ, who represented, in form, the first
coming and who began the movement from maintenance to sustenance of
Christ-consciousness. Let’s consider why this representation should be
necessary. 

<sup>17.8</sup> As the universe is not comprised of the unnecessary, nor
are human beings. The universe, as well as human beings, are comprised
of nothing that is superfluous, but only of the necessary in the sense
that all the given components are necessary for wholeness.
Representation of the power of Christ-consciousness in human form was
necessary to complete the cycle of birth, death, and rebirth.

<sup>17.9</sup> Christ-consciousness was represented not only by Jesus,
but by his mother, Mary. Mary, like Jesus, realized full
Christ-consciousness and full expression of Christ-consciousness in
form. Each did so in individual ways, ways that revealed the choices
available to those who would follow after them. One way, that of Jesus,
was the way of acceptance, teaching by example, and preparing a way for
those who would approach Christ-consciousness through teaching and
learning and leading example lives. Another way, that of Mary, was the
way of creation, and was a representation and preparation for those who
would approach Christ-consciousness through relationship. 

<sup>17.10</sup> The way of Jesus represented full-scale interaction
with the world, demonstrating the myth of duality, the death of form,
the resurrection of spirit. The way of Mary represented incarnation
through relationship, demonstrating the truth of union, the birth of
form, and the ascension of the body. Both ways were necessary. Both ways
were necessarily represented or demonstrated. Both ways were represented
and demonstrated by many other individuals as well. The way was a
choice.  The main ability of the individual is the ability to represent
what God created, the means of coming to know—which is
Christ-consciousness—through individual choice or will. 

<sup>17.11</sup> Christ-consciousness is your will to know, to be, and
to express.  The time of Christ, and the second coming of Christ, are
expressions meant to symbolize the completion of the cycle of birth,
death, and rebirth as a means of coming to know. 

<sup>17.12</sup> What Jesus represented or demonstrated has now been
realized, which is why this is called the time of Christ. The “time” of
Christ, whom so many associate with Jesus Christ, represents the “time”
of fulfillment of the way of Jesus. What could be taught and learned has
been taught and learned. Now it is time to move beyond what could be
taught and learned to what can only be realized through relationship.
Now is the time of the final revelation of what can be realized, or made
real, through following the example life of Jesus. 

<sup>17.13</sup> Thus we enter the ending stage of what can be realized
through fulfillment of the way of Jesus and the beginning of the
fulfillment of the way of Mary. This ending stage of the fulfillment of
the way of Jesus is the stage of interaction with the world, the time of
miracles, the death of the old way and the birth of the new.

