---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "16"
title: "Day 15: Entering the Dialogue"
---

<sup>15.1</sup> When you fully realize that sharing is necessary you
will have *entered the dialogue*. When you have fully surrendered to the
fact that you can’t come to know *on your own* you will have *entered
the dialogue*.  When you fully accept that the voice of the one can be
heard in the voice of the many you will have *entered the dialogue*.
When you fully realize that you are in-formed by everything and everyone
in creation, you will have *entered the dialogue*. 

<sup>15.2</sup> To inform is to make known. Thus *you* can be made known
by everything and everyone in creation just as everything and everyone
in creation can be made known by you. We have just spoken of the
*unknown* and your willingness to accept your relationship with it in
order for you to come to know it. The unknown and the known exist
together in everything and everyone. Thus your willingness to be made
known and to know exists alongside your willingness to embrace the
unknown. 

<sup>15.3</sup> The spirit that animated all things is the spirit that
is in all things and that is the great informer. As you are more fully
able to maintain Christ-consciousness you begin the movement away from
being observed to being in-formed by the spirit which animates all
things. You begin the movement away from observing to informing. 

<sup>15.4</sup> How can the invisible be observed? From within
Christ-consciousness, you begin to be able to know and to make known
without observation or observance *of the physical*. This occurs
*through your relationship with the unknown*. You begin to be informed
by what is without any regard for your level of understanding or
knowing.  You do this by taking what is into your spacious form rather
than observing it as separate from you. 

<sup>15.5</sup> Previously, what you did not observe, or see, was not
real to you.  Through the practice of observance of the physical and the
obvious, you began to be able to see beyond the physical and the obvious
to what could not be observed physically. This practice had two
purposes. The first purpose was the establishment of a new kind of
interaction and relationship between observer and observed.  The second
purpose was your preparation to move beyond observation.

<sup>15.6</sup> It has been in the relationship of observation that you
have interacted with all other life forms as well as with inanimate
forms. In the relationship generated by observation, those forms have
been perceived as real. That observation produced the solidity and mass
of the forms you observed. Yet it is the spirit that animates form that
is real. Informing could be understood as making the spirit known in the
form of physicality. It is not simply the bringing of spirit into form
but the making known of spirit in form. What you made known through
judgment-free observation was but the precursor to what is made known
through informing. 

<sup>15.7</sup> The difference between simply bringing spirit into form
and making spirit known through form is the difference for which the
time has come.  The observation you have practiced has prepared you to
move from observation to informing and being informed.  

<sup>15.8</sup> The animation of form with spirit is an ongoing aspect
of creation.  It is thus not time bound. It did not take place at the
birth of creation and then cease to be. It did not take place at the
birth of the body and then cease to be. It is not about life and making
form alive but about spirit and informing spirit. It is about making
spirit known through the form of physicality. 

<sup>15.9</sup> In practicing observation without judgment, you learned
to be neutral observers. Being neutral observers allowed cause and
effect to occur naturally rather than having your judgment alter natural
cause and effect. This practice will continue to serve you and will not
be replaced, but supplemented by the new practice of informing, until
the practice of observation is no longer needed. 

<sup>15.10</sup> This is the new realm of power that few in physical
form have practiced and that has never been practiced by many at one
time. It is a major shift because it is not neutral but creative. It is
of creation and can only flow through those who have mastered neutral
observation because the intent of creation, rather than the intent of
the observer, is the creative force, the animator and informer. Yet
informing is a quality of oneness and thus the joining of the self with
the spacious Self in oneness and wholeness must precede this step. This
power cannot be misused because it is unavailable to those who have not
realized their oneness with the creative force. Thus while it is not the
self who informs and is informed by the creative force, it is the Self
joined in union with the creative force that informs and is informed. In
other words, in union there is no distinction between the Self and the
creative force of the universe, the animator and informer of all things. 

<sup>15.11</sup> Engaging in dialogue with those who join you on the
mountain top is necessary to this next step. One reason is that it
allows a starting point for your practice. While it is possible to
practice observance in every situation, it is necessary to practice the
ability to inform and be informed with others who have reached this
level of neutrality along with you. This is why observation is not being
replaced. Observation is needed until this level of neutrality is
reached by a much greater number. This greater level of neutrality will
not be reached until those who are the forerunners have practiced and
mastered this interaction with the creative force long enough to realize
their oneness with it.  While there is division remaining between the
self and the spacious Self, the self and the creative force, you remain
in the state of maintenance rather than sustenance of
Christ-consciousness. This is an acceptable state for this time of
limited practice with those with whom you are engaged in this specific
mountain top dialogue. It is not an acceptable state for full-scale
interaction with the world. Although this power cannot be misused, to
have access to this power in one instance and not another as you move in
and out of the state of Christ-consciousness will not serve the purpose
of creation. 

<sup>15.12</sup> What does it mean to practice informing and being
informed? It means to join together with others who have the ability to
maintain Christ-consciousness in your company. This creates the joining
together of spacious Selves. It is a joining without boundaries. You
become clear pools flowing into each other. You make your spirits known. 

<sup>15.13</sup> This cannot be explained in great detail, which is why
it must be practiced.  It is to your own authority only that you must
appeal for guidance. The first step is to access your own readiness. Are
you able to be a clear pool? If not, what prevents you? Do not be too
hard on yourself now, for as has been said, the stones within your pools
are like flecks of sands within the ocean. Observe these stones with
neutrality and see if they do not wash away. Your willingness to have
them gone is all that is required. If doubts of your readiness continue
to persist, remember that doubt is caused by fear. Examine what you
fear. Is it really the stones within your pool, or is it the challenge
of moving with the current that you know will be generated by the
joining of spacious Selves? Do you fear your power even though you have
been told it cannot be misused? Do you feel unworthy and seek to keep
your unworthiness hidden? Do you still fear being known? 

<sup>15.14</sup> If so, enter the dialogue with the purpose of your
final preparations in mind. Bring your fears into the light of oneness
and see how the light dispels the darkness. This is what we are here
for. There is no time to waste and no protracted length of time will be
required if your willingness is true. 

<sup>15.15</sup> You are here to make one another known and in so doing
to know oneness. It will be less difficult to know this voice as the
voice of oneness once you have listened to the voice of oneness in each
other and benefited from its healing properties. To heal is to make
whole. To make whole is to become the spacious Self. To become the
spacious Self is to become ready to be informed and to inform with the
spirit of creation. 

<sup>15.16</sup> This is a very “individual” stage in the creative
process. “Group think” does not replace the consciousness of the One
Self with the “one group self.” This is not a time of being judged or of
adopting the beliefs of others but one of finally conquering judgment
with neutrality or acceptance.  Allowing others to accept you as you are
is a gift that releases them from judgment and any notion that may have
remained within them that Christ-consciousness is a form of “group
think.” Never will you feel more like an individual than when you are
made known through the informing of spirit! 

<sup>15.17</sup> Realize how necessary dialogue is. Many resist this
stage of development because they feel they have achieved inner knowing.
They may still consider themselves to be capable of growing and
changing, but feel, in a certain sense, that it is unnecessary. They
have achieved a goal consistent with their concept of inner knowing and
mistaken this as knowing the Self. Movement is necessary to know the
Self. The on-going informing or animation of the physical with the
spiritual is just that—on-going. The easiest way of all to slip from
knowing to not knowing is through stagnating in a “known” place. To
cease to accept the unknown is to cease to come to know. 

<sup>15.18</sup> Entering the dialogue keeps you in constant contact
with the unknown and with unceasing coming to know. 

<sup>15.19</sup> You thus are not to come together as the known but as
the unknown.  You dialogue about the unknown, not the known.  By keeping
in constant contact with the unknown you stay in constant dialogue for
you have not claimed a knowing that disallows coming to know. You are in
dialogue because in dialogue, coming to know is a fluid exchange. 

<sup>15.20</sup> Imagine the current of the energy, or clear pools of
the spacious Selves, coming together. This current washes some stones
clean and washes others away. It changes the clear pool by dredging up
sediment that has settled on the bottom. As the clear pool merges with
the current of other clear pools it is able to change directions, see
new sights, gain new insights. While this is only an initial, or
practice stage of movement, it is obvious that movement will always be
needed for the clear pool to not become a stagnant pond. 

<sup>15.21</sup> To be engaged in dialogue with certain others is
different than entering the dialogue, but entering the dialogue is not
different than engaging in specific dialogues. This is so because
entering the dialogue is an all-encompassing state in which everything
and everyone interacts with you through the exchange of dialogue. While
you are asked to promote wholeness and the sustainability of
Christ-consciousness with others sharing this specific means of coming
to know with you, you are not asked to disregard any other means of
coming to know or to see any others differently than you see those with
whom you are engaged in this specific dialogue for this specific purpose
or practice. 

<sup>15.22</sup> However, knowing that you have entered the dialogue
does not mean that you will not have an awareness of those who would
infringe upon, rather than join with, your boundary-less state. You must
but remember that those who still have boundaries have a need for those
boundaries.  Thus you are not depriving them of anything when you slip
into observable states of being. There is a purpose for this time in
which both informing and observing, being informed and being the
observed coexist. You must respect the boundaries of those who are still
in need of them and not offer more than can be received. This is why
practice among those who are ready to be boundary-less and spacious
Selves is appropriate and acceptable. 

<sup>15.23</sup> To practice, as to inform, is to make known. To
practice, as to inform, does not mean, however, that you know nothing.
Practice is the merging of the known and the unknown through experience,
action, expression, and exchange. It alters the known through
interaction with the unknown. It allows the continuing realization that
what you knew yesterday was as nothing to what you know today, while at
the same time, aiding in the realization that what you come to know has
always existed within you in the realm of the unknown that also exists
within you. 

<sup>15.24</sup> While you have not been asked to remove yourself from
life during this time on the mountain, you have been asked to be here
and to join with others here for a purpose. As such, this time is also a
beginning to the practice of realizing and being able to accept a
certain duality.  Without necessarily realizing it, your consciousness
has been in two places at once without being divided. As you re-enter
life on level-ground, this ability to carry an undivided but spacious
consciousness with you will be paramount and will have many practical as
well as spiritual applications. 

<sup>15.25</sup> One of the practical aspects has just been
discussed—that of engaging in dialogue with some and entering the
dialogue with all. This is a demonstration of levels of consciousness at
work. It is important to be able to hold the spacious consciousness of
the One Self and also to be able to focus—to not exclude while also
making choices about where your attention is given.  Just as you respect
the boundaries of those who are still in need of boundaries, you also
must respect your own boundary-less space.  

<sup>15.26</sup> As you engage in dialogue as the spacious Self and are
made known, your purpose here will become more clear. Thus your ability
to embrace all while focusing on your own purpose in being here, will
begin a new process of individuation. The distinctness of your own path
will be made visible and you will see that it may be quite different
from the others with whom you are coming to know, and perhaps quite
different than you thought it would be. You will be shown that you can
enter the dialogue with all and still focus, or place your attention, on
areas that might not interest others in the slightest. 

<sup>15.27</sup> You may, thus, find that there is a time of walking
alone approaching, or a time of gathering with many. You will realize
that you have felt cocooned by the time on the mountain and by those who
have joined you, and that you may have grown less eager to strike out
*on your own*. You may have thought the joining being done here was the
joining with a specific group rather than a joining with yourself and
with all.  This fallacy needs to be brought to your attention now so
that as you join in true spaciousness with those coming to know along
with you, you do not create false ideas concerning what this is about. 

<sup>15.28</sup> Remember that this journey has not been about becoming
self-less but about realizing your true identity. We have now debunked
your myths about your true identity being an idealized form of the self.
Now are you ready, through your ability to view your own Self as well as
that which you observe with a neutrality that embraces the unknown as
well as the known, to reclaim your Self and your purpose here.

