---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "16"
title: "Day 16: Paradise Re-Found"
---

<sup>16.1</sup> Everything that can’t be seen but is, is consciousness.
Accepting everything that can’t be seen, including the unknown, is full
consciousness. Acceptance is key. You can’t accept what you fear.

<sup>16.2</sup> Because all that is not physical exists only in
consciousness, it simply exists. It is simply “there” within
consciousness. All that you “know” because you have felt it, is still
there because consciousness is eternal. All that you have learned that
has touched your heart is there because you felt it. All that you have
thought is still there because you thought it. 

<sup>16.3</sup> What is of form comes and goes and is impermanent.  What
is of spirit, or consciousness, is eternal. 

<sup>16.4</sup> Sickness has been defined as rejected feelings, feelings
about which consciousness was not chosen. With this rejection, these
feelings became physical. What is not of consciousness is of physical
form. The rejected feelings that became physical were made separate from
the self and yet were maintained within the body, thus interrupting the
body’s natural means of functioning.  Sickness is not sickness but
rejected feelings. The rejected feelings exist as separate and forgotten
physical manifestations until they are willfully remembered and accepted
back into the spacious Self. Rejected feelings are those for which you
blame yourself. Sickness is the form of manifestation of rejected
feelings.  These manifestations come to you to prove to you what you
think you know—that you are responsible for the sorry circumstances of
your life. 

<sup>16.5</sup> Ejected feelings are projected outside of the body.
These are the unwanted feelings that are blamed on others. These
manifest in your interactions with the world, taking on form in the
actions of others, in instances where acts of nature or accidents seem
to thwart plans, or in “situations” or crises of all kinds. These
manifestations also come to you to prove what you think you know—that
others, or the world in general, are to blame for the sorry state of
your life. 

<sup>16.6</sup> This is what is meant by no escape. No escape does not
mean that anyone is bound to the past and to their former pain but that
each is still bound to, and affected by, all that has been rejected or
ejected.  All that has been expelled is part of the wholeness of the
Self. As what was ejected or rejected and became “real” is returned to
the Self, the physical manifestation dissolves, because the source,
which was separation, is no more. In other words, illness is no longer
observable once what was rejected rejoins the spacious Self. The illness
was but is no more. Because it was physical it came only to pass.
Because the feeling that generated the physical manifestation was not
physical to begin with—was not of the physical world—it returns to its
non-physical nature within the spacious Self. Thus it was not escaped
but reintegrated into the oneness of the Self. 

<sup>16.7</sup> This reintegration requires, of course, a change in what
you want to prove to yourself. All you may now continue to seek proof of
is that your feelings, rather than your thoughts about your feelings,
reflect who you are, and that by acting on them, you will act in accord
with who you are and thus in accord with the universe. The reintegration
is the process through which you discover this proof, proof of the
benevolence of your feelings and of the benevolence of the universe
itself. 

<sup>16.8</sup> What happens when feelings of loneliness or despair,
anger or grief join with the spacious Self? This joining occurs only
through acceptance. Without acceptance, the separation remains along
with the physical manifestation. 

<sup>16.9</sup> It is only in the present that acceptance can occur.
There is no “going back” or reliving of the past required. There is also
no escape, however, because in Christ-consciousness, you must become
fully aware of the present. The present is the time of no time,
wholeness, where all that is real and all that was ever real exists.
While the physical manifestations of all that you feared and expelled
were not real because they were projections rather than creations, the
feelings were real because you felt them. Had you not feared and
expelled them, you would have seen that they were nothing to fear.

<sup>16.10</sup> You have no feelings that are bad. Fear is not a
feeling but a response to a feeling. Emotions are responses. You have
been told there are but two emotions, love and fear. What this is really
saying is that there are but two ways to respond to what you feel—with
love or with fear. If you respond with fear you expel, project, and
separate. If you respond with love you remain whole. You realize that
you have no feelings that are bad. You embrace sadness, grief, anger,
and all else that you feel because these feelings are part of who you
are in the present moment. When you remain in the present moment you
remain within Christ-consciousness where all that is exists in harmony.
To embrace is the opposite of to escape. To hold all within yourself in
the embrace of love is the opposite of holding onto what you have
already responded to with fear and made separate. There is no escape for
there is only the embrace. The embrace is Christ-consciousness. 

<sup>16.11</sup> This relates to everything, not only your response to
sickness or crisis situations, because it relates to whether or not you
are able to remain in a state of constant coming to know. What you expel
is what you do not want to know. What you try to control is what you do
not want to know. You do not want to know every time you predetermine,
in advance of knowing, what something is or will be. You predetermine,
or decide, for instance, that a physical symptom is bad, and then choose
to find out what is “wrong,” in which case your “decision” rather than
your “feeling” is only confirmed. When you feel uneasy or uncomfortable
about a situation, you determine that you already know that the
situation is bad or is most likely going to be bad, and then you “think”
that through your effort or control you can alter the situation for the
better. Only when you accept that no feelings are bad will you allow
yourself to come to know what they truly are. 

<sup>16.12</sup> When you feel an “intuition” you respond differently
than you do to unwanted feelings that you are quick to want to “do
something” about.  If all feelings were treated more like intuition is
treated—with a “knowing” that the feeling has come to tell you something
that is as yet *unknown* to you, but nevertheless for your benefit, you
would go a long way toward acceptance. 

<sup>16.13</sup> All that you predetermine you have come to know will be
cause only for suffering, arrogance, and righteousness if you attempt to
hold onto it as the “known” and do not remain in a constant state of
coming to know. What you would hold onto is based on fear and expelled
into solidity where you can keep your eyes upon what you have “formed”
an opinion about.  What you hold within the embrace is held in love and
so exists along with you in the spacious state of constant coming to
know.

<sup>16.14</sup> Consciousness, or the spacious Self, thus includes
feelings of sadness, loneliness, and anger as well as feelings of
happiness, compassion, and peace. Consciousness does *not*, however,
include your responses. Consciousness thus does not include either love
or fear. This is because love is everything and fear is nothing. 

<sup>16.15</sup> Consciousness began as all feeling and all thought, all
of which were of love because love is everything. All feeling and all
thoughts of love extended into the paradise of creation. This was the
Garden of Eden, the Self, the All of All. Unwanted feelings that you
attempted to expel from the Garden of Eden were not expelled from
consciousness, but from your awareness. This created the separate and
the unloved in your perception, and your perception created an unreal
reality of the separate and unloved, often referred to as hell or hell
on earth. Love and fear existed simultaneously as did paradise and hell.
This became your world, which slowly grew from a world primarily made up
of paradise and love, to a world primarily made up of hell and fear
because as more was expelled from paradise, more was perceived as
hellish or fearful.  Less of love was extended. More of fear was
projected. 

<sup>16.16</sup> The expelled feelings that seemed to cause this duality
still exist in consciousness. Once these expelled feelings are returned
to the spacious Self and the spacious Self embraces them with love, the
spacious Self will be whole, for it will embrace everything, as
love—which *is* everything—embraces it.  This is paradise re-found.

