---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "19"
title: "Day 19: The Way of Mary"
---

<sup>19.1</sup> Those of you who are the forerunners of the way of Mary
may have felt confusion over your sense of calling. You know you are
called to something, and something important, but it does not have a
form within your mind and so you see not how it can become manifest in
the world. In other words, you know not what to do. You perhaps see no
“specific” accomplishment in your future, but see instead a way of
living as the ultimate accomplishment. You see living as who you are in
the world as the accomplishment that is needed from you and yet at times
you compare yourselves to those who are able to live as who they are in
the world *and* accomplish certain functions within the world. You
perhaps feel function-less and purposeless at times, while at other
times, you feel as if you are being exactly as you are meant to be. 

<sup>19.2</sup> The key here is discernment between true contentment and
denial.  Although this is overly simplified, you might think of this as
the artist being content in creating art, the musician in creating
music, the healer in creating health. Those of the way of Mary are
content with a way of living. Yet everyone has a function to fulfill in
creation of the new world. Only those who express themselves are truly
content. 

<sup>19.3</sup> You can see right away, however, that if the artist,
musician, or healer were content *only* in their expression of their
specific gifts, their contentment would not be complete. Neither would
it be complete without that expression.

<sup>19.4</sup> Being content is being fulfilled by the *way* in which
you express who you are—by the way you express your content—your
wholeness. Those who use their gifts to create the truth they see are
those who in “doing” find their way to true contentment and true
creation. They become who they are to be through their acts of creation.
Those called to the way of Mary are called to be what they want to see
reflected in the world and to the realization that this reflection is
the new way of creation.  In their being they become what they want to
create. 

<sup>19.5</sup> The ultimate accomplishment is living as who you are
within the world. But in what kind of world? This is the catch that
causes feelings of purposelessness in those who are content to live as
who they are within the world. Until they realize the power of
reflection, they wonder why they, unlike their brothers and sisters
called to “do,” do not have a specific part to play in establishing the
world in which all are able to be content with who they are. 

<sup>19.6</sup> The answer lies in the simple statement of *as within,
so without*.  By living as who you are in the world, you create change
in the world.  You create change in the world through relationship. All
live and create in relationship. Those called to the way of Mary,
however, are called to the creation and anchoring of the new
relationship in the new world.  Their relationship of union, upon which
their contentment is based, is the birthplace, the womb of the new.
Their expression is expression of this union.  

<sup>19.7</sup> To be called to a specific function that creates change
is really to be called to a function of preparing one or many for the
change that must occur within. The function of those called to the way
of Jesus is to call others to the new through means so widespread,
varied, and remarkable that they cannot be ignored. 

<sup>19.8</sup> Just as Jesus would not have been literally birthed
without Mary, the way of Mary cannot be reborn without the way of Jesus.
Both ways arose from Christ-consciousness as demonstrations of ways.
Those who have thought of Mary as an intermediary are as inaccurate in
this belief as are those who thought of Jesus in such a way. Neither
demonstrated intermediary functions but demonstrated direct union with
God. Each demonstrated the creative aspect of that function in different
ways. But the function remained one of direct union with God. This is
quite literally the function of all in this new time. When we speak of
functions unique to each, we speak of expressions of this one ultimate
function. Together, the way of Mary and the way of Jesus demonstrate the
truth of *as within, so without* and the *relationship* between the
inner and outer world.

<sup>19.9</sup> The way of Mary is not a place or state of
non-interaction however.  This is not the state or place of the monks,
nuns, or the contemplatives of old. It is not solitary nor isolated, nor
confined to a specific community. It is a way of existence in which
relationship is paramount.  It is not listening to a calling to “do” but
a calling to “become.”

<sup>19.10</sup> All are called to become, but some must “do” in order
to “become.” Those called to the way of Mary are not required to do in
the sense of fulfilling a specific function that will become manifest in
the world, but are required to do in the sense of receiving, sharing,
and being what they are asked to become. This is an act of incarnation,
and is a new pattern, a pattern of what can be imagined being made real,
not through doing, but through the creative act of incarnating in union
with spirit. It corresponds with the end of the way of Jesus in that the
way of incarnation is the way of miracles. It corresponds with the end
of the way of Jesus in that an example is provided. It differs only in
that the example is not an example of an individuated life but an
example of the union and relationship that is all life. 

<sup>19.11</sup> This is not to say that those called to the way of
Jesus will find acclaim and those called to the way of Mary will find
obscurity. Many called to the way of Mary will “do” much that is greatly
desired in the world but what they do will be a byproduct of their way
of being rather than a means of facilitating that way of being. Many of
the way of Mary will find acclaim, yet neither acclaim nor obscurity
will matter to those following these ways. Being true to the Self and
the calling of the One Self is all that matters. Eventually all will
follow the way of Mary and such ideas as acclaim and obscurity will be
no more. But at this time of transition, both ways are needed to
demonstrate the means of coming to know, which are what all true
expression is about. 

<sup>19.12</sup> The fear of losing the self is still the primary fear,
even among those who have never found the self. They fear losing the
known to the unknown. The two ways of demonstration make the unknown
known. One makes the unknown known through individuated example lives.
One makes the unknown known through creation of the new so that the
unknown is no longer unknown but made available to be experienced. 

<sup>19.13</sup> This availability is what is meant by the anchoring of
the new.  Those who, in relationship with the unknown, through unity and
imagination, create the new by means other than doing, open a way
previously unknown, and as all forerunners do, anchor that way within
consciousness by holding open this door to creation. They, in truth,
create a new pattern and begin to weave it into the web of reality,
anchoring it for discovery by their brothers and sisters. 

<sup>19.14</sup> The truth of this way is not discovered through the
passing on of knowledge in form but through relationship. Those
following the way of Mary become mirrors of the truth they discover,
reflecting the way to their brothers and sisters. This is why this is
not a place or state of non-interaction but of great interaction. It is
a state that facilitates knowing through relationship. This occurs
through the one Self of form. 

<sup>19.15</sup> In this action of joining in union and relationship is
contained the key to creation of the new. It was spoken of earlier as
the act of informing and being informed, as the step beyond that of
observing and being observed. It is where creation of the new can begin
because it is the intent of creation, rather than the intent of the
observer, that is the creative force, the animator and informer. Being
joined in union and relationship allows for the channeling of creation
through the one Self because the one Self is joined in union and
relationship. 

<sup>19.16</sup> This is very tricky for those who reach highly
individuated states and it is necessary for those of the way of Mary to
support, encourage, and reflect the new to those being examples of the
way of Jesus. This too is tricky for it can lead to judgment. When there
is more than one way, there is always room for comparison and judgment.
Thus it is realistic to see the two ways as intertwined circles existing
in support and harmony with one another. As those given specific
functions fulfill those functions, they move naturally to the way of
Mary. 

<sup>19.17</sup> Without those pursuing the way of Jesus, those pursuing
the way of Mary would have a much more difficult task. There would be
little space in which to anchor the new. Those following the way of
Jesus create the openness of the spacious Selves who allow for the
anchors of the new to be cast and thus to ride out the many storms of
this time of transition.

