---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "23"
title: "Day 23: Carrying"
---

<sup>23.1</sup> Forget not that who you are is what you are here to make
known and thus you must be a being who knows love without fear, joy
without sorrow, and life-everlasting. You must *be* this. *A Course of
Love* gave you the understanding you needed in order to realize that you
*are* this.  The Treatises gave you a way to apply this understanding.
This dialogue is meant to give you the means to carry what you have been
given. 

<sup>23.2</sup> As air carries sound, as a stream carries water, as a
pregnant woman carries her child, this is how you are meant to carry
what you have been given. What you have been given is meant to accompany
you, propel you, and be supported by you. You are not separate from what
you have been given, and you do carry what you have received within you. 

<sup>23.3</sup> As we spoke earlier of being a channel, today we speak
of being a carrier.  Your instruction has been given. Now the task
before us is to come to understanding of the means by which you will
carry what you have been given down from the mountain and onto level
ground, the ground of the earth, the place where you are connected and
interconnected to all that lives and breathes along with you. We are
coming metaphorically and literally out of the clouds, out of the
illusion, surrendering the mist that was all that separated one world
from another. 

<sup>23.4</sup> The clouds of illusion, even those that have gently
surrounded our time together on the mountain top must now be
surrendered, much as a woman surrenders her body to the growth of a
child within. This is a willing but not an active surrender. It is a
surrender to the forces that move inside of you. It is a knowing
surrender to the unknown. It is a willingness to carry the unknown into
the known and the known to the unknown.

<sup>23.5</sup> Surrendering to the forces that move inside of you is
surrendering to your own will. It requires full acknowledgment that you
hold within yourself a will to know and to make known. This will is
divine will, your will, Christ-consciousness. It is alive within you.
All that is required is that you carry it with awareness, honor,
willingness. From this will the new be birthed.

