---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "24"
title: "Day 24: Potential"
---

<sup>24.1</sup> You are the caterpillar, the cocoon, and the butterfly.
This is the way that you are many Selves as well as one Self. You are a
Self with many forms. The form you occupy contains all of your potential
manifestations as the form of the caterpillar contains all of its
potential manifestations. 

<sup>24.2</sup> You are the virgin, the pregnant, the birth, and the new
life. This is the way of the world as well as the way of creation. What
is unaltered remains unaltered despite its many manifestations.
Wholeness exists in every cell, in each of every smallest particle of
existence.  Wholeness exists in you. Nothing can take wholeness from
you. It is as natural to you as it is to all of creation. It does not
exist only once potential is realized or made manifest, but always in
all things. 

<sup>24.3</sup> Potential is that which exists.  It exists as the power
and energy, the spirit within you. It does not await. It simply is. It
can remain as the untapped power of transformation, or it can be
released. The choice is and is not yours.  This power is a force of
nature that exists, not separately from you, but not separately from
nature either. It is triggered in any number of ways, only one of which
is by your choice.  When it was said that *A Course of Love* was a
trigger, it was meant that the Course is both a trigger of choice and a
trigger of nature. It was meant to convey the action of a catalyst. Now
it is up to you whether you allow your true nature to be revealed. 

<sup>24.4</sup> To struggle against your nature is what you have spent a
lifetime doing. Stop. If you allow your potential to be released, your
true nature in all its wholeness will be revealed.

<sup>24.5</sup> You might think of the caterpillar as the unaltered self
with which you began your journey. You might think of your body as the
cocoon, the carrier of your potential. You might think of the butterfly
as your spirit, revealed only after the potential has matured and been
released.  There is, in other words, a necessity for each step in the
accomplishment of wholeness, even while wholeness has always existed as
potential. Do not forget, however, that wholeness has always existed,
that potential is that which exists, or that potential does not await.

<sup>24.6</sup> To attempt to remain within the cocoon of the body, to
attempt to contain the spirit within that cocoon, is to attempt the
impossible. It is the nature of spirit to become. Its wings poke and
prod from within as its potential is triggered. Only with release from
its container can it become. 

<sup>24.7</sup> Yet the body is not left behind. The caterpillar, the
cocoon, and the butterfly have always been one and remain one. Each form
is but a different stage in the becoming of the spirit. Without release,
it must die to its present form in order to begin again. Thus spirit is
always becoming, even when it must die to begin again. 

<sup>24.8</sup> Will activates potential. It is the greatest of all
triggers. An activated will realizes that you are the carrier of all the
potential that exists.  An activated will releases the power that is
potential.  Remember potential is that which exists, that which is. It
is not that which is not, not that which is in the future, not that
which could come to be, but that which is. 

<sup>24.9</sup> Potential is what you carry, as air carries sound, a
stream water, a pregnant woman her child. You carry your potential to
the place of its birth through an activated will, a will that is also
carried within you.  This merging of will and potential is the birth of
your power and the birth of the new.

