---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "27"
title: "Day 27: The Apprehension of Levels of Experience"
---

<sup>27.1</sup> Think now not of being apprehensive in terms of being
fearful of the rest of your life, but apprehensive in terms of taking
hold of the rest of your life, of keeping it within your understanding,
within your ability to come to know, within your own grasp of it. You
have been asked to let go of much, but not of life. 

<sup>27.2</sup> You have been asked to let go of uncertainty, not
certainty. You have been assured of a certainty you never before
believed you were capable of. This certainty is beginning to form within
you but will not come into its fullness except through experience. This
certainty has only been able to begin to form within you because you
have agreed to this mountain top experience while remaining engaged in
life. You have thus begun to experience on two levels. This has been a
goal of the time we have spent together in this way. 

<sup>27.3</sup> Experiencing life without the insight of spirit was to
experience external life. Life itself showed you the way, pointed you in
differing directions, taught you what you needed to know. This was the
external experience of life. Most of you have had well-examined external
lives.  You have looked for causes behind the direction in which life
led you, but your life was not inner-directed because it was devoid of
inner sight. While you looked outwardly for signposts to guide you, the
self-guidance of inner sight was not developed. 

<sup>27.4</sup> Inner sight made an appearance on occasion, showing up
as flashes of insight. These flashes of insight might be thought of as
brief views from the mountain. The obstacles confronted on level ground
suddenly gave way and you saw clearly, if only for an instant. You saw
as if from a great distance, and because of that great distance, your
view was expanded. 

<sup>27.5</sup> This is the quality of the inner sight you now will
carry with you to level ground because you have practiced during our
mountain top time together the ability to experience on two levels. 

<sup>27.6</sup> Coming to know is not an aspect of the mind alone. It is
not an aspect of the spirit alone.  Coming to know is a quality of inner
sight, of wholehearted human experience combined with spiritual
experience. You are and always have been both human and spirit, both
form and content.  Now you contain within you the ability to combine
both levels of being through the experience of life. You have already
been doing this. You are, in fact, becoming well-practiced. 

<sup>27.7</sup> Now you are asked to apprehend—to understand, and to
hold within your conscious mind—this situation that you find yourself
in, this new relationship that you have with yourself and with life. You
quite literally have a new way of seeing. You might think of this
initially as having two perspectives, an internal and an external
perspective, a human perspective and a spiritual perspective, a
perspective from level ground and a mountain top perspective. Your
descent from the mountain top will not mean that you no longer have the
perspective gained there.  You did not “go” to the mountain. The
mountain came to you.  

<sup>27.8</sup> As you continue to practice your apprehension of this
new situation, it will become more than a concept. As was spoken of in
“A Treatise on the Nature of Unity and Its Recognition”, it will become
a trusted ability and, through practice, lose its dualistic seeming
nature and become as intrinsic to who you are as is breathing. In this
same way, the dualistic seeming nature of all of life will be revealed
to only seem to be so. 

<sup>27.9</sup> The two levels of experience which you have been
participating in are the joint cornerstones for the biggest revelations
yet. All that is now seen as dualistic in nature can be experienced as
different levels of experience of one whole. You might consider this by
again picturing the mountaintop. Looking in one direction, you might see
only darkness.  Looking in another, you might see the dawning of light.
Opposites exist only as different aspects of one whole. Different
aspects exist only as different levels of experience. 

<sup>27.10</sup> To be able to hold onto, apprehend, and carry with you
the ability to experience both levels of experience, the internal and
the external, the form and the content, the human and the divine, is to
elevate the self of form, or, in other words, to be what you have always
been: Whole. 

<sup>27.11</sup> As darkness and light, hot and cold, sickness and
health are each just opposite ends of the same continuum, you can now
see that they are only distinguished by degrees of separation. So too
have you been. 

<sup>27.12</sup> The degree of your separation from wholeness can be
seen much as the degree of separation between hot and cold. If you were
to perceive of wholeness as an ideal temperature, you might think for a
moment, just as an illustration, of your experience of separation always
taking place at a certain number of degrees away from the ideal. The
“temperature” was thus never perfect, but rather always either too hot
or too cold.  Yet the perfect temperature always existed, you just did
not experience it. You were, in other words, separate from it because of
the degree of separation that you chose. Because you never chose union,
or wholeness, you did not experience lack of body temperature or the
effects of weather, but it is as if you denied your body the ideal 98.6
degrees internally and 78 degrees externally. There is no living body
that does not exhibit a temperature, no environment that does not do so.
Some kind of temperature is thus a constant. A constant is an aspect of
wholeness. A variable is an aspect of separation. The constant does not
become variable because variability exists. 

<sup>27.13</sup> That you are who you are and that you have always been
the accomplished is a constant and an aspect of wholeness. The
variability of how you experience who you are is also a constant within
the aspect of separation. Merge the two, however, into one level of
experience and the whole formula changes.

<sup>27.14</sup> This is what we move toward as we practice
participating in two levels of experience simultaneously. We practice
experiencing the constant and the variable as one. We practice
experiencing the constant and the variable together. We practice in
order to move toward an experience of variability within wholeness
rather than within separation. It can be done. 

<sup>27.15</sup> Life, your humanity, is the variability. Spirit, your
oneness, is the constant. Life is oneness extended into separation and
variability through experience. The elevated Self of form will be the
expression of new life lived within the constant of wholeness but
continuing to experience the variability of separation. This is what you
practice as you gather on the mountain top while remaining on level
ground. 

<sup>27.16</sup> Separation, as well as the variability of the
experience of the separate self, have always been variables that exist
within the constant of wholeness. What you have experienced, however,
has not been wholeness or the experience of wholeness, but the
experience of separation. What we are speaking of now is being able to
experience wholeness *and* the variability of experience that has come
through the separated self of form. This is what you are beginning to do
through your practice. Your proficiency will change your experience, and
your experience will change the world.

