---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "20"
title: "Day 20: The First Transition"
---

<sup>20.1</sup> Now we begin preparation for your transition to level
ground. We depart even farther here from the guidance you have relied
upon so that you begin to rely more and more fully on the truth of this
dialogue.

<sup>20.2</sup> You have realized now your relationship with the unknown
and ceased to fear it. You are, perhaps, even eager now, to move beyond
the known to the unknown. You are perhaps eager without fully realizing
that this eagerness symbolizes a true ending—an ending within you and
within your reality—an ending within your conscious awareness. A true
end of learning. 

<sup>20.3</sup> This is the first transition, the transition in which
you really “get it” that the unknown cannot be taught, laid out on a
map, or shown to you by another. 

<sup>20.4</sup> When you read what has been written here, you perhaps
think this is a contradiction, for surely you have been told much here
that you did not previously know. This isn’t quite accurate however.
What has happened here is that words have been put on the feelings and
remembrances that you have within your minds and hearts and have been
sharing in this dialogue. The way of saying this perhaps is new, but the
*way* of saying this is the expression of the human being receiving it.
The way in which you are hearing and responding to these truths is
perhaps new, but that way too is of the human being receiving it, in
this case, you. 

<sup>20.5</sup> The truth is the truth. It doesn’t change. It is the
same for everyone. 

<sup>20.6</sup> What, then, is the unknown? The reception and expression
of truth. 

<sup>20.7</sup> This is why you can “know” while always coming to know.
Why you can know yourself and constantly be coming to know. The only
thing there is to know is the One Self in its many expressions. You are
the known and the unknown. Everything is both the known and the unknown. 

<sup>20.8</sup> You *are* the expression of the unknown and the *only*
means of the unknown becoming known. 

<sup>20.9</sup> In other words, all the truth and all the wisdom that is
available but *unknown* to you, takes *you* to make it known. And if
this is the only way that the beauty, truth, and wisdom of the One Self
can be made known, then *you* are the source and the power of coming to
know and making known. 

<sup>20.10</sup> Apply the art of thought to this idea and you will
complete the first transition.

