---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "22"
title: "Day 22: Channeling"
---

<sup>22.1</sup> If we have spoken little of channeling here, it is only
because you have been coming to know yourself as channels without the
need for these words. Now we must speak of this, however, for there is a
confusion that can occur in regards to channeling. Yesterday we spoke of
teachers being channels during the time of learning. It was also noted
that you realize that all of life is a channel. There is a big
difference between seeing a teacher as a channel, all of life as a
channel, and the Self as a channel or channeler. 

<sup>22.2</sup> Let’s look at the idea of channeling as simply an idea
of expressing, but an idea of expression that is given and received,
received and given. When the word channeling has been used in reference
to spirituality, it has often been used to indicate an intermediary
function. The channeler was perhaps seen as a mediator between the
living and the dead or the world of spirit and the world of humanity.
This idea separated the living and the dead, the spiritual and the human
into two states, states that could—at their most basic levels—be seen as
known and unknown states. The teacher in the example used was also an
intermediary with the separation being between the known and the
unknown. Thus, a channel could be seen as that through which the unknown
moves into the state of knowing. This is the way in which life itself
can be seen as a channel. Since the first transition involves realizing
that *you* are the expression of the unknown and the *only* means of the
unknown becoming known, it is important to discuss this in as many ways
as possible to make this idea clear to you. You are life, and you are
also surrounded by living forces channeling to you constantly. 

<sup>22.3</sup> Channeling, in the commonly understood spiritual sense,
can either promote a sense of separation or a sense of unity. The sense
of separation comes when the channeler is seen as having something
unavailable to everyone rather than being seen as a means to provide, or
channel, availability to everyone. What each person channels is unique
and only available through their expression. The availability is there
for everyone. The means of expression is there for everyone. What is
expressed is different because it is a combination of the universal
(what is available) with the individual (what is expressed). Whether one
chooses to avail oneself of the channeled or expressed universality of
another is a choice and another indicator of the uniqueness of
channeling. The universal is everything. The channel is what, from among
everything, is allowed reception and expression. Some will find many
avenues of channeling available to them, both through themselves and
through spiritual channels, without realizing that both are the same
because both require a choice, a choice to allow entry or union. In this
choice, the universe (what is available) is channeled through the
expression of (individual) desires. 

<sup>22.4</sup> Every choice is thus a means of channeling. It is taking
the infinite number of experiences or information available and
channeling only what one desires to know.  Thus, it is prudent to repeat
once again, that *you* are the expression of the unknown and the *only*
means of the unknown becoming known. You, in other words, are the
channel, the conduit, of the unknown becoming known. What you choose to
know and how you choose to know it is an act of channeling. 

<sup>22.5</sup> There is also, however, the idea of a channel as a
passage to take into consideration. This we have spoken of previously as
your access to union—as a place or state of consciousness through which
your awareness of unity passes through your self of form. It is clear,
when looked at in terms of process, that there is no intermediary
function involved in channeling, but a function of union. This is the
very function that you have waited to have revealed to you, the function
you have known you are here to fulfill, the function of direct union
with God. 

<sup>22.6</sup> It does not matter that everyone’s function is the same
because no one expression of this same function produces the same
results. No one who is in union with God is in union with the known. Yet
it is as if through this union you have learned a great secret that you
long to share. But what is it? And how do you share it? How do you
convey it?  How do you channel it? Through what means can you express
it?  Can you put it into words, make it into images, tell it in a story?
You will feel as if you will burst if you cannot share the union that
you touch when you fulfill your function of direct union with God. How
do you let it pass through you to the world? 

<sup>22.7</sup> The most simple, direct, and uncomplicated answer is
that of living love. The simple answer is that you must express the
unknown that you have touched, experienced, sensed, or felt with such
intimacy that it is known to you *because* the knowing becomes real in
the making known. It is the only way it remains real. You know union in
order to sustain and create union by channeling the unknown reality of
union into the known reality of separation. You realize that you know
the unknown and you desire to make the unknown knowable. You realize
that you have known a place where nothing but love exists, where there
is no suffering, no death, no pain nor sorrow, no separation or
alienation. You sense that if you could fully express this place of
union, if you could abide there, if you could share this place in an
aware and conscious state, that you would bring this state into
existence in the reality in which you exist. 

<sup>22.8</sup> This awareness of union with God is what is now within
you awaiting your expression. Awareness of union with God exists in
everything. It is there in every tree and every flower, in every
mountain stream and every blowing wind. It is there in each and every
human being. It is now time to quit acting as if it is not. It is time
to be a channel for the awareness that exists in every tree and every
flower, in each mountain stream and in the blowing wind. It is time to
be a channel for the awareness of union with God that exists in every
living being. 

<sup>22.9</sup> This awareness is what we have been calling
Christ-consciousness, but what you call it now matters not.  All the
words that have been expressed here, that say so many similar things in
so many different ways, are words that are simply calling you to
realization of your union with God and to the new world you can create
once you accept and make real this union. 

<sup>22.10</sup> You might think of yourself as a channel through which
union with God is expressed and made real here and now. There is no
other time.  There is no “higher” self waiting to do what only you can
do. There is no one else who knows what you know the way you know it or
who can express the unknown in the way that you can express it. The
unknown can only be made known through reception and expression. Call it
what you will for what you call it matters not. Throw out all the words
that express the unknown in ways that you would not, and find your own.
Each way is needed. 

<sup>22.11</sup> Remember only the feeling that a place of union exists
in which you know God, in which you know love, in which you know of joy
without sorrow, and life everlasting. This is the great unknown that you
can make known.

