---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "28"
title: "Day 28: From Externally to Internally Directed Life Experience"
---

<sup>28.1</sup> At one time there seemed to be little or no choice
between staying engaged in an externally directed life and removing
oneself from life.  This may have seemed to be an either/or proposition
and thus one of limitation. Moving from an externally directed to an
internally directed experience of life creates unlimited choices. The
unlimited choices of internally directed experience are what you must
begin to face as we begin our descent from the mountain top. To wait
until level ground is reached to begin to view the choices available
would be to put off coming to know the difference between externally and
internally directed life experiences. 

<sup>28.2</sup> Most of you have experienced several stages of
awareness, and we will speak here of those experienced during the years
of what is called adulthood, coming of age, or the age of reason. These
have been discussed before so this will be kept brief and illustrate
only what is needed for our discussion of the next stage. 

<sup>28.3</sup> The first stage of awareness is a stage of simple
external movement through life.  Many people, especially young adults,
have little experience other than this. Their lives are directed almost
totally by external forces, from parents, to mandatory schooling, to
somewhat voluntary schooling. 

<sup>28.4</sup> As the time of schooling is left behind, the next stage
of movement begins, that of external movement toward independence. With
this movement, the number of choices increase and the level of awareness
increases with the increase in choices available. As young people do not
usually move away from the home of their parents until they are at least
college age, the opportunity to move away, move out, become more
independent increases the awareness of self as self. As the self matures
beyond school age, the choices become those of degrees of independence,
moving away, moving into one’s own sphere of friends, colleagues,
relationships. For some these choices include commitments to
partnerships of a personal or professional nature. For some these
choices include marriage and starting a family. Some follow a more
standard pattern than others, with schooling, career, marriage, and
family seen as an almost inescapable as well as desirable norm. Others
pursue dreams or adventures. 

<sup>28.5</sup> All of these choices are externally directed. They may
include a great deal of inner reflection in order to be made, but they
are still directed at external outcome. By living the experiences of
these externally directed life situations, growth occurs, changes
happen, new avenues to explore at times open up, leading to the next
level of experience: That of external movement toward a chosen type of
life. 

<sup>28.6</sup> At this level, some people reach a crossroad that feels
like a choice that will move their lives in such a different direction
that it is both exciting and at times excruciatingly difficult. Others
reach a plateau of sorts and just keep following the opportunities that
are presented along one path. They may have chosen one career, for
instance, and made choices within that career path, but never really
consider a different career path. Many simply reach a state of
reasonable comfort and will make no choices that will affect that
comfort level. 

<sup>28.7</sup> All of these stages may be associated or accompanied by
religious or spiritual experiences that seem to help guide the choices,
but the choices remain the same: Externally directed choices. 

<sup>28.8</sup> Now something new awaits you. It is a choice so
different and a means so revolutionary that it will take some getting
used to. This change is predicated on all the changes that have come
before it, including, and most particularly, on that which was most
recently spoken of, that of apprehending the new reality of wholeness.
It is not wholeness that is new, but the reality of wholeness that is
new. The reality of being able to experience the variability of
separation from within the state of wholeness is what is new. 

<sup>28.9</sup> This must be kept foremost in your mind. The reversal
spoken of recently, the reversal from believing in a giver and a
receiver to knowing that giver and receiver are one, is also of
paramount importance. 

<sup>28.10</sup> You and your life are one. Your life is not the giver
and you the receiver. 

<sup>28.11</sup> You and God are one. God is not the giver and you the
receiver. 

<sup>28.12</sup> This is wholeness. 

<sup>28.13</sup> Depending on the circumstances of your life, one of
these two attitudes will have a reverse side that will have a greater
hold on you.  Your life may have shown you that you are not in control
in many ways and at many times. Therefore, you think that you must take
what life has to “give.” This is most likely the attitude of those whose
major life dilemmas have been of a monetary or career nature, where
success or failure “in life” is seen as the most crucial element of a
happy life. 

<sup>28.14</sup> If the attitude you will have greater need of reversing
is that of God determining the circumstances of your life, you have
probably been more affected by the relationships of life, by loss or
death of loved ones, by accidents, or illness, or “natural” disasters,
by the unexplainable forces that have affected you with sadness more so
than with ideas of success or failure. Therefore, you think that you
must take what God has to “give.” 

<sup>28.15</sup> Most people feel at least some combination of these two
attitudes, but will find that one is prevalent.  You must now get past
all such notions or attitudes. 

<sup>28.16</sup> Acceptance has been a main theme of this dialogue and
was revisited and defined as acceptance of internal rather than external
conditions. It makes no sense, however, to accept what is not the truth.
Most of what is not the truth has been identified as old thought
patterns. This is all that the notion of a giver and a receiver is: An
old thought pattern.

<sup>28.17</sup> Thought patterns exist within thought systems that have
been externalized and are part of the world on level ground. These
external systems are based, as are all that you have made, on the
externalization of what is within. At the same time, however, what is
within has been based upon what was previously externalized. This is
what now must change, and as can be seen, this change is essential to
changing the world. 

<sup>28.18</sup> This change, this transformation, can only take place
within time because only within time is the experience of separation
possible, and experience is where the power of transformation lies. This
transformation will, however, take you beyond time, because once
experience is moved out of the realm of separation and into the realm of
union or wholeness, new conditions will apply. This is why it has been
said that the changes that are to come are not about time-bound
evolution. Only this first change, this first transformation, must take
place in time. 

<sup>28.19</sup> This is the change, the transformation, we have been
working on by changing your experience of time to one of experiencing
two levels of “time.” Our “time” on the mountain would be more rightly
described as “time outside of time.” 28.20“Time outside of time” by
itself will not cause the shift that needs to occur, however. What will
create the shift is the ability to experience “time outside of time” and
“time” simultaneously. Thus is the “wholeness” of time, or eternity,
experienced and made real. Eternity might thus be seen as the unchanging
constant that has not been affected by the variable of time. Said in
another way, eternity and time are part of the same continuum as are
properties such as hot and cold. They are part of the same whole that is
the constant of all that is whole—all that is one. 

<sup>28.21</sup> So too are giving and receiving and giver and receiver. 

<sup>28.22</sup> To move to internally directed experience is to make
the move into wholeness that will cause the “shift of the ages,” the
experience of variability within wholeness.

<sup>28.23</sup> The key to this movement is the simple realization that
it is possible. This is what our time on the mountain has provided you
with: The experience required in order to realize a new possibility. 

<sup>28.24</sup> As you move toward wholeness, all the pieces of all
that we have talked about will begin to fit together. A whole will form
within your mind much as if you have been following a thread and now can
see the tapestry. This tapestry will bear the mark of your experiences
and will be like no other. The thread represents your own journey to
truth, your own journey to wholeness. 

<sup>28.25</sup> Separation is desired no longer, but experience is.
Your will and God’s are one and thus it is being made so.

<sup>28.26</sup> Presently it is as if you follow two threads, the
thread that has led you to the mountain and the thread of the life from
which you have not removed yourself. Now you must begin to weave these
two threads together into the tapestry of your new life. This weaving
will take place as you continue to intertwine the two experiences that
you are simultaneously holding within your conscious awareness. 

<sup>28.27</sup> This is what we will continue to speak of as we
conclude this dialogue.

