---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "32"
title: "Day 32: The Experience of the Self and the Power of God"
---

<sup>32.1</sup> The experience of the Self is God. It is not from God.
It is not of God. It *is* God. 

<sup>32.2</sup> If all of life is the oneness that is God and God has
chosen to experience that oneness through relationship, then you are
also that experience and are in relationship with God through that
experience. 

<sup>32.3</sup> Here we must revisit the concepts of oneness and
manyness for if you retain any notions of God that are inaccurate, they
will arise here. 

<sup>32.4</sup> Let us discuss, for a moment, the concept of God because
everyone has at least some sort of concept of God. 

<sup>32.5</sup> First we will look at the concept of God as Supreme
Being—God as *one* being, *one* entity. When thought of in such a way,
it is somewhat easier to relate to God than when God is thought of in
broader terms.  You might think of God as you think of yourself. When
thinking of the ideas put forth here, you might think of God deciding to
know Himself.  You might think of God deciding to create. You might
think of God creating. You might think of God granting free will to His
creations.  Then, perhaps, you might think of God resting, or standing
back and witnessing the unfolding of all that He created. 

<sup>32.6</sup> What would the purpose of this be? Would God be standing
back, judging Himself on the goodness of what He created?  Thinking that
He’d like to make adjustments here or there, perhaps, but no, He has
already granted free will so He can’t do that? If the original purpose
was knowing Himself, what kind of knowing would this provide? Wouldn’t
this suggest a situation similar to a parent thinking he or she could
know him- or herself through observation of the children they produced? 

<sup>32.7</sup> Another concept of God is that of Creator. This concept
might have nothing to do with the notion of God wanting to know Himself.
This concept may be quite amorphous and not tremendously different than
scientific notions of the source of life. Whether it be called God or
the Big Bang or evolution, this notion presents the concept of something
being begun and then turned loose, proceeding from its beginnings under
scientific or natural laws. 

<sup>32.8</sup> Another idea of God within the concept of a Creator God
is of God existing in all of what has been created. God is, within this
concept, seen as the spirit within all that lives and also seen as an
overriding spirit, a force, a unifying factor. God is closer, within
this idea, to being a participatory being, but still falls short. Man
lives and has free will.  Animals abide by the laws of nature. God is
still a concept. 

<sup>32.9</sup> Yet most religious beliefs encompass the concept of a
living God.  How might God live? Could He live in time and space in a
dimension we know not?  Does He live as the spirit within us, and as
such have some small role, perhaps akin to that of what we refer to as
our conscience?  What kind of life would this be? A difficult to imagine
life at the very least.

<sup>32.10</sup> A *concept* of God is not necessary. False concepts of
God, however, are compromising to God and to Self. 

<sup>32.11</sup> Jesus spoke to you of his life as an example life.
Jesus was called the Son of God and also God. Those who understand the
meaning of any or all of the example lives that have come as revelations
of who God is, understand that those lives were not separate from God. 

<sup>32.12</sup> Yet to believe that God is everyone can still make you
feel as if you are not God. How can this be? This can be only because in
your contemplation of this idea, you lose your sense of self.  There is
a rebellion, a negation of either the self or God that occurs when these
two concepts—concepts of the self and of God—cannot be reconciled or
joined in harmony. Either the self or God takes precedence in all lives.
*All* lives. There is no other choice as long as the self and God are
seen as separate. 

<sup>32.13</sup> Whether God is seen as Creator or Supreme Being, God is
still seen as the All Powerful. While God is seen as the All Powerful,
man is disenfranchised. Even while God is perhaps seen in all things, or
as the spirit by which all that lives, lives, God is still seen as
having what man has not. The list of what one can imagine makes God
powerful and man not could be endless, just as one could make an endless
list of what they believe differentiates God from man. The example lives
in which the power of God was demonstrated in the lives of men and women
are seen as little more than pass-through situations in which the power
of God passed through men and women to other men and women. 

<sup>32.14</sup> Only Jesus was known as the Son of God and as God. This
is why Jesus came as your teacher and was used as the example life for
this work. This is the point that this work has striven to get across.
That man and God are one. Not only is man God. But God is man and woman
and child. God is. 

<sup>32.15</sup> And yet, God could not be all that is, or God would not
be in relationship. If the natural world around you has revealed
anything to you of the nature of life and God, it has revealed to you
the truth of relationship. As has been said before, if separation had
severed relationship, then separation would truly exist. Each entity or
being would be singular and alone. Yet God has been referred to as the
All of All. How could God be the All of All and not also be man? How can
God be all that is and at the same time not all that is? How can God be
the All Powerful and Living God and also be lowly and powerless man?

<sup>32.16</sup> God has also been referred to within this work as
relationship itself. Let us consider this idea newly by considering
God’s relationship to Jesus. 

<sup>32.17</sup> The claimed relationship of God to Jesus was that of
Father to Son but also as one in being. One in being, but different in
relationship. 

<sup>32.18</sup> Could God be one in being, but different in
relationship, to each of us? Could not God’s oneness of being be the
consciousness we all share? Could not God’s relationship to everything
be what differentiates God from us and us from God? So that we are both
one in being *and* different? Could it be that while we are one in being
with God we can also become more god-like through the practice of holy
relationship?  Could not the instructions that you have been given—such
as those of access to unity, and becoming a spacious Self, and the means
that have been used, such as the two levels of experience you have
achieved during the days and nights of our time together—be attempts to
show you how you can be more like unto God in relationship, even while
you *are* God in being? 

<sup>32.19</sup> Would this answer your questions concerning how God is
both different and the same? Would this answer your questions concerning
God’s great power when compared to your own? Could you see that God’s
power stems from His relationship to everything rather than from His
being? This is the easiest way to say this, if not quite accurate. Being
is power. But being, like oneness, cannot know itself without
relationship. You *are* one in *being* with your Father, with God, with
the Creator and with all of creation. You are also, however, a *being*
that exists in relationship. The extent of your ability to be in
relationship is the extent of your ability to be god-like. 

<sup>32.20</sup> God is the being and the relationship. You are capable
of all the power of God’s being but you are powerful only as God is
powerful—in relationship. Because God is in relationship with
everything, God is All Powerful. Because you are in a state of limited
relationship, you have limited power. This is the difference between God
and man. This difference, however, can be diminished as you embrace holy
relationship.  As you embrace holy relationship you can become powerful
as God is powerful.

