---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "36"
title: "Day 36: Who You Are in Unity and Relationship"
---

<sup>36.1</sup> The exercise of your power is in the creation of your
experience.

<sup>36.2</sup> As an ego-self, you created an experience for yourself
that was separate from all others. You made choices concerning how you
would live your life from within the realm of what you considered
possible. You did so continuously. This was the way in which you created
your experience of a separate existence. 

<sup>36.3</sup> Your experiences in their totality you call your life.
Yet you have stood apart from these experiences—all of them.  You can
look back on your life and see its form. You could write an
autobiography describing every experience you encountered between your
earliest memory and the present moment and it would say nothing about
you if it related the experiences only as physical events. Your
experiences may, in their totality, be called your life, but they cannot
be called you. You stand apart. And yet in your choice of, and response
to your experiences were you revealed, because, in this way only, were
you a creator. 

<sup>36.4</sup> Powerlessness is moving through life as a being without
the power to create. 

<sup>36.5</sup> You have felt like the creator of your life in the
choices you have made. The experiences of consequence to you were the
experiences of choice. Experiences that were “of” your choice are those
that would move the story of your life along as a “personal” experience
rather than as experience itself. Even experiences dictated by “fate”
were of consequence only in your response after the fact. The story of
your life, in short, would be a story of how you chose to respond,
day-in and day-out, to the world around you. You, in short, created your
life through chosen responses. You created your life through your
responses to the circumstances of your birth, your opportunities or lack
of opportunities, the fateful incidents that you encountered, the people
you met. You started with what you believed you had been given, the self
that you saw yourself to be—the self you considered immutable and
unchangeable—and proceeded from there. Yet you created in *response* to
“reality” rather than *creating* reality. Now you are called to create
reality—a new reality. 

<sup>36.6</sup> This is where you begin again. Begin again with the Self
you now know yourself to be. 

<sup>36.7</sup> When you start over, knowing that what you have been
given is everything, your creatorship of your experience is a totally
different exercise. You realize that your life is not you but that your
life is an exercise in creatorship. Creator and creation are one. You
are one in being with the power of creation and different in your
relationship to and expression of that power. 

<sup>36.8</sup> Can you not see that if you can create your experience
you can create a new reality—a new world? Can you not see the difference
between creating as a separate self in response to a “given” set of
circumstances in a “given” world and creating your experience as a
creator who has realized oneness and unity—who has realized a new
reality? The old reality was that of separation. The new reality is that
of union. It is new only in that it has gone uncreated. 

<sup>36.9</sup> This is a true starting over with the true realization
that giving and receiving are one and that both are within your power.
This is starting over with the realization that you can give yourself a
new set of circumstances and a new world by creating it as your
experience. This is starting over with the realization that you are now
the creator of your experience. You have always been creating because
you have always been one in being with God who is endlessly creating.
But you are only now a creator in union and relationship. 

<sup>36.10</sup> The difference here is all the difference in the world.
It is the difference between all and nothing in relationship to one
another.  Recall the example used earlier. There is no difference
between all and nothing without relationship. In relationship, the
difference is everything. This same difference is what is meant when it
is said that you are one in being and different in relationship. Without
your awareness of unity and relationship, it was as if God was
everything and you were nothing, or as if you were everything and God
was nothing. But just as with all and nothing, there was no difference
between your being and God’s being without relationship. You could
conceive of self and God in different ways, but you could not truly
create difference but only perceive of difference.  You thus always
remained one in being with God, yet continued to relate only to a world
and to experiences you perceived as being either created by a separate
God or created by your separate self. You experienced the power of being
because you were a being who existed, but you did not experience being
powerful. 

<sup>36.11</sup> There is only difference between your being and God in
relationship. This is the example that the ideas of Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit as a trinity representing one God were meant to portray. The
Son could only be God in relationship to God. The Holy Spirit could only
be God in relationship to God. The Father could only be God in
relationship to God. God could only be the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit
in relationship. Without relationship, God is simply all—being. Without
relationship, what is not God is simply being—simply existing at the
opposite end of the continuum of everything that is creation. 

<sup>36.12</sup> What we have called illusion *is* this simple
nothingness of existence without relationship to God, and thus existence
without relationship to the power of creation. The illusion is an
illusion of simply being. Is this not how you have seen yourself? As a
simple *being* doing your best to live the life you’ve been given? All
the choices in the world save this one before you now, have made no
difference to your state of being. You have just kept being, kept making
choices between one illusion and another in your separate reality. A
separate reality that cannot exist in truth but only in illusion. 

<sup>36.13</sup> Despite all of this, you have always had some
remembrance of yourself as a creator.  Despite all of this, you have
loved and feared, grown and evolved, made choices of integrity and
courage, responded with nobility or doubt, boldness or timidity, all
within a frame of thought and feeling that has felt completely real to
you and is completely real to the separate being you have been being. 

<sup>36.14</sup> Because you have always been one in being with God,
this power—this power of being—has always been yours. The power to feel—
love, hate, anger, compassion, greed, humility, and longing—has always
been yours. The power to think—rationally or passionately, logically or
instinctively—has always been yours. The power to create—everything from
weapons of mass destruction to cathedrals of towering majesty—has always
been yours. The power to know or perceive—even an unreal reality—has
always been yours. 

<sup>36.15</sup> To be a being of feeling, thought, creativity and
knowing or perception is to be one in being with God. Accept this, for
this is what God is and what you are. This is being. To be one in being
with God and yet to exist outside of the powerful state of relationship
and union has been a challenging choice. A god-like choice. A choice for
a new kind of experience that has led to the creation of an unreal
reality so populated by the god-like and the god-less, so near to
replacing creation with destruction, so joyous and loving, and so hate-
and pain-filled, that you have been moved to a new choice. 

<sup>36.16</sup> When you realize that you are one in being with God and
different in relationship you accept the power of being, or
individuating God. You accept the power of God. You become powerful. 

<sup>36.17</sup> God remains God who is one in being with all, and God
also is given form, or is, in other words, differentiated. God is All in
All.  And God is also All in One and All in Many. God is still the
Creator of All, but God is also now the Creator of One, the Creator of
the experience of one life, or many lives, the experience and the
experiencer of life. Through differentiation, God is you as you are God.
God retains oneness of being and also becomes a being in union and
relationship—in short—a being in union and relationship with you.

<sup>36.18</sup> Yet you do not disappear or cease to be. You are not
replaced by God whom you have always been one with in being. You simply
accept the truth of being *and* the truth of being in union and
relationship. Both at the same time. Both/and rather than either/or.
Cause and Effect. Means and End. You accept the end of choice and the
beginning of creation.

<sup>36.19</sup> You can see, now, perhaps, why we have had to build
your awareness slowly in order for you to be able to reach this place
where you may be able to accept this new idea which is simply the truth.
It is the same truth that has been stated here in many different ways to
allow you to become accustomed to the idea of a truth that may seem
heretical to some of you when it is stated as directly as it is being
stated here. But our time together is coming to an end and your
acceptance of the truth of who you are and who you can be is essential
to the accomplishment of our mission—to the creation of a new heaven and
a new earth. The only way to create it is to experience it. The only way
to experience it is to create it. All that stands in the way of your
creatorship is your final acceptance of who you are in unity and
relationship.

