---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "33"
title: "Day 33: Being in Relationship"
---

<sup>33.1</sup> As we begin to speak of power, we must return to the
initial idea put forth in “A Treatise on the New”: That all are chosen.
To embrace an idea of some having power while others remain powerless is
to embrace an idea laden with conflict. The power of God exists within
everyone because all are one in being with God. And yet this power
cannot be used. It can only serve. What does it serve? The cause of holy
relationship. 

<sup>33.2</sup> Relationship is the interconnective tissue that is all
life. The *answer* of how to respond to each and every relationship—and
remember, here, that situations and events are relationships too—lies
within your own being. Being in relationship. This is what you are and
what your world is. *Being* in relationship. 

<sup>33.3</sup> All relationship is holy because it is within
relationship that *being* is found and known and interacted with.
Relationship is thus the route or access to being and being the route or
access to relationship.  One cannot exist without the other and thus
both are one in truth. This is the divine marriage, the divine
relationship of form and being. 

<sup>33.4</sup> While these may seem like simple words, or like a theory
being proposed, these words are at the heart of the new way of seeing
yourself—a way of seeing that will create a new world. 

<sup>33.5</sup> Say to yourself, as you confront the events and
situations of your world, that you are *being* in relationship. It is to
your *being* that the people, places, events and situations that make up
your world appeal. It is in your response that *who* you are being is
revealed. 

<sup>33.6</sup> You are *being a who*. Your *who* is your individuated
Self.  But your *who* is also your representation of *being*. The two
becoming one—the individuated Self becoming one in being—is the aim
toward which we have journeyed together. 

<sup>33.7</sup> You might think of *being* as *what* you are, and
responding as *who* you are. You have been told that these words are
being given to you so that you do not respond to love in the same way
again. This wording may make love sound as if it is an event, something
that comes to you or happens to you. Yet if relationship and being are
one, and you are one in being and different in relationship, what is
being said is that being and relationship are of one piece, one whole,
and that whole is love. In other words, every relationship, everything
that comes to you, every event, every situation, is *of* being, which
*is* God, which *is* love. 

<sup>33.8</sup> How, then, do you respond? If you respond as *who* you
truly are, you respond with love. Love is the only response. 

<sup>33.9</sup> Yet the response of love can look as different as the
events, situations, people, and places that populate your world. How can
this be? And how can you look at each event, no matter how horrific, as
a response of love? 

<sup>33.10</sup> The *only* way that you can do this is by always
knowing and never forgetting *who* you are. You are *being* in
relationship: The creator of events as well as the experiencer of
events, the creator of relationship as well as the relationship itself.
You either know this or you don’t.  It is not about “believing” that
this is so, but knowing that this is so. It is when you *know* that this
is so, and you also know *who* you are, that you know with certainty
that the only response is love. 

<sup>33.11</sup> All relationship is with love because all relationship
is with God, who is one in being with you. 

<sup>33.12</sup> Being is power.  Relationship is powerful. In other
words, relationship is the expression of power—all the different
expressions of power. In the time of Jesus, the powerful were seen as
being blessed by God and the powerless as not being so blessed. This way
of seeing has gone much unchanged. All are powerful. But, since all are
powerful only in relationship, your relationship to power must be
realized. Those who are powerful have realized their relationship to
power. Those who see themselves as powerless have not realized their
relationship to power.  They have not made it real and so it has not
served them. 

<sup>33.13</sup> And yet, since no one can exist outside of relationship
and relationship is where power is expressed, everyone does have a
relationship with power. Power is one in being with each and every one
of us. Every single individual has within them the power to affect,
change, or recreate the world. Every single individual does so to the
extent to which they realize their power. A baby realizes the power of
its cry within moments of being born. Many a teenager develops full
realization of the power of their independence.  In other words, you
each have claimed some type of power for yourself, some means of
exerting that power, which is the same as saying some means of
individuating the Self. 

<sup>33.14</sup> This is the power of being. The power to individuate
the Self. The power to be who you are. This is power and the source of
power. This is the force of creation, the *only* true power. 

<sup>33.15</sup> But again, despite that we each hold the power of
creation within us, it is only in relationship that it is expressed and
that we become powerful. To realize that you are in relationship with
everything and everyone all of the time, is to realize the full extent
of your power.  You *cannot* realize that you are in relationship with
everything and everyone all of the time and retain the desire to use
your power. This is impossible. The realization that you are in
relationship with everything and everyone all of the time is the
realization of oneness and unity, the realization that you are one in
being, creator and created. This is a realization that only comes of
love because love is the only “condition” of union. 

<sup>33.16</sup> Thus when you realize your relationship to all, you are
all powerful.

