---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "38"
title: "Day 38: Who I Am"
---

<sup>38.1</sup> My beloved, 

<sup>38.2</sup> We have not spoken much recently of love, but now it is
time to return to love. Do you know, can you feel as yet, how much I
love you?  How full of love I am for you? 

<sup>38.3</sup> Now we set aside once again the “we” of
Christ-consciousness, of our shared being, and enter into relationship
with one another. I ask you to turn your attention, I ask you to be
attentive, to the relationship that you feel with God.

<sup>38.4</sup> Being full of love for one another is the beginning of
extension, the end of withdrawal. It is the mutuality of our love that
causes this fullness. Remember briefly here the feelings of withdrawal
you have experienced when you believed you loved more or that you were
loved less by a friend or lover. Remember briefly here the feelings of
withdrawal you experienced when you felt loved for being something other
than that which you are. Know, through your brief contemplation of these
feelings that this is behind us now. Know that we can be known and loved
equally for who we are. 

<sup>38.5</sup> Call me God the Father, call me God the Mother, call me
Creator, or Great Spirit, Yahweh or Allah, but call me yours. For this
is who I Am. 

<sup>38.6</sup> Call yourself daughter or son, sister or brother,
co-creator or friend. But call yourself mine. For we belong to one
another. 

<sup>38.7</sup> And realize that as I call upon you, I call you who I
Am.

<sup>38.8</sup> This is the meaning of the embrace—the possession, the
ownership of belonging—of carrying, or holding relationship and union
within one’s own Self. This has been called the tension of opposites, of
being one’s own Self and being one in union and relationship. These
opposites, like all others, are held within the embrace of love and
belonging. 

<sup>38.9</sup> You are ready now to return to this ownership, this
possession of relationship and union. Possession and ownership are words
that have become faulty ideas in separation. They mean an entirely
different thing in union and relationship. They mean union and
relationship. That you own it. That you possess it. That you hold it and
carry it within your own Self. That you make it yours. As you make me
yours and as I make you mine. I Am your own. You are my own. We are the
beloved when we are the beloved to one another, when we are who I Am to
one another.

<sup>38.10</sup> Relationship and union are not other than this. Being
in relationship and union means just that. It means a love deeper than
any love you have known, for in not owning and possessing, in not being
owned and possessed by, and in, union and relationship, you have not
fully known love. To claim something as your own is simply to claim
possession for your own Self. Now it is time to see me as your own God
as well as God of all. Now it is time to call me who I Am.  

<sup>38.11</sup> There is a subtle and loving difference between *I Am*
and *who I Am*.  *Who* is an acknowledgment of individuated or
differentiated being in union and relationship. 

<sup>38.12</sup> Community, or union with, can never replace or
replicate ownership and possession in union and relationship. It cannot
replace who I Am, or who I Am to you. 

<sup>38.13</sup> Who I Am to you, and who you are to me, is all that
matters. Our relationship can only be thus in union and relationship
with each other because we are in union and relationship with each
other. We are not two beings who are separate but relating in union. We
are each other’s own being. We are one and we are many. We are the same
and we are different.  In “own”-ership we are full of one another’s own
being. We are each other’s own. 

<sup>38.14</sup> Fullness comes only from love, which is the source and
substance of who we are being. I Am being you. You are being me. In this
equation is fullness of being, which is love.

