---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "30"
title: "Day 30: Yielding to Wholeness"
---

<sup>30.1</sup> What is held in common is shared and is a characteristic
representation of the whole. Just as simple fractions can be added
together to achieve wholeness once a common denominator is found, your
own fractiousness can yield to wholeness through the common denominator
of the Self. A common denominator is simply that which yields to
wholeness. This yielding is a natural process. To yield is to give up,
surrender, but also to produce and bear fruit. 

<sup>30.2</sup> The two levels of experience we have spoken of might be
seen as the process, much like in math, through which the common
denominator is found. The common denominator is not by itself the whole,
but is, in combination, the whole. In order for a common denominator to
be found, more than one (fraction, part, or variable) must exist. The
purpose of finding a common denominator is to translate what is more
than one into one. An assumption of wholeness is “common” in every
denominator. 

<sup>30.3</sup> A denominator is a named entity. To denominate is to
name. “In the beginning” the separate expressions of the whole were
named. This naming was an act of creation, stating simply the existence
of what was named or denominated. Existence and wholeness are the same.
Thus your existence, the existence of the Self, is, or can be, a common
denominator of wholeness. In our act of saying it is so, we name or
denominate the Self as what is common to wholeness. Despite unlimited
variations being available, commonality is also always available. Thus
no matter how fractious are the separate selves, commonality and
wholeness always exist and have always existed. 

<sup>30.4</sup> Wholeness cannot be achieved without joining, thus the
commonly known injunction of “where two or more are joined together.” If
you would think of this in terms of “God” or the state of “Wholeness” or
“Beingness” separating into more than one in order to know Itself, you
would see that knower and known are one. You would see that two or more
is needed in order for knowing to occur. To not know wholeness would be
to be in a state of nothingness. Thus the joining of two or more are
needed in order for wholeness to be known and thus to exist as a state
of conscious awareness. 

<sup>30.5</sup> Now let us consider this in terms of experience. As
knower and known are one, experience and experiencer are one. In other
words, one must experience in order to know. It follows then that what
is experienced is what is known. It also follows then, that to not
experience joining is to not experience wholeness. Stated another way,
the *self* cannot know the *Self* without *joining* with the Self. The
Self must be the knower and the known, the experience and the
experiencer.  The quest to join with God is this quest. The quest to be
the knower and the known, the experience and the experiencer. The
culmination of this quest, then, is joining.

