---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "39"
title: "Day 39: Who I Am to You"
---

<sup>39.1</sup> My beloved, 

<sup>39.2</sup> It is time now to come to your own discovery of who I Am
to you. No one can give you this answer, not even me, because this is
the nature of who we are. Individuated beings are who we are in
relationship to one another. 

<sup>39.3</sup> You have heard of life spoken of as a projection.
Because we are all one being, we must either extend or project in order
to individuate and be in relationship. You are an extension of I Am into
form. Through *your* extension, you can become who you are to me,
instead of who I have been to you. 

<sup>39.4</sup> You may find it difficult to give yourself an answer to
who I Am to you in words, and even if you are able to do so, you may not
be able to share this answer in a way that makes sense to anyone else.
Let this tell you something.

<sup>39.5</sup> We are going to speak again of contradiction here. Of
the importance of your knowing who I Am to you, and of the importance of
being able to continually discover who I Am to you. Of your embrace of
knowing, and your embrace of mystery. Of knowing me as your God and as
God of all. Of knowing you are no longer being *on your own* and yet of
having to come to this realization of who I Am to you *on your own*. 

<sup>39.6</sup> This is the beginning of individuation in union and
relationship.  This is the beginning of wholeness. What you strive for
here is revelation. For only through revelation can you know all and
still hold the mystery. This revelation is not something being withheld
from you.  But it is a revelation that can only come to you as an
individuated being in union and relationship. This is what makes it a
true revelation. Because true revelation is between you and me.
39.7“Between” you and me is the presence of Christ. Remember we have
talked about the Christ “in” you.  Remember that you have been told of
Christ being a bridge. When you relate to anyone, Christ is there,
bridging the distance that would keep you separate and holding you in
relationship.  Christ has provided the necessary link between the
separate and each other, between all and God.  Yet if the time of Christ
is about the end of the need for the intermediary, what becomes of the
intermediary relationship Christ seems to offer? Are you ready to hold
relationship *on your own*?

<sup>39.8</sup> Contemplate the “buffer” nature of all that is
intermediary. An intermediary stands between as well as links. It is a
totally unnecessary requirement in unity because the boundaries of
separation have fallen. To be individuated being in union and
relationship is to *be* Christ, to realize that what we call Christ is
the integration of relationship into the Self. 

<sup>39.9</sup> Being in union is being all. Being in union and
relationship requires individuation, and individuation requires
relationship. Thus you must now accept yourself as Christ, or as the
bridge of relationship between all that is individuated in union and
relationship.  

<sup>39.10</sup> This is why you must discover your own relationship
with me.  Discovering your own relationship with me is discovering the
Christ in you. When you have discovered your own relationship with me is
when you have discovered that you are who I Am because you realize—or
make real—your oneness with Christ. When you have discovered your own
relationship with me is when an intermediary is no longer needed—because
you have realized and made real your oneness with Christ. When
relationship is established you realize that relationship *is* the
intermediary link between individuated beings and that you hold this
link, through relationship with me, within yourself. Christ is direct
relationship with me. 

<sup>39.11</sup> Establishing this relationship with me may sound lofty
and difficult, but it is simple. It is as simple as relationship is
within your everyday life. You may not think that relationship within
everyday life is simple, but you also know it as a constant. You know
that you have had “good” relationships and “bad” relationships, love
relationships and work relationships, and that being in relationship
with “others” is an inescapable truism of your life.  Even these
relationships of separation, the types of special and not-so-special
relationships you have chosen to leave behind, are not done away with
but only transformed. Relationship is part of life.  Inescapable.
Acceptance that our relationship is and that it is a determinant of who
we both are, is all that is required. The relationship that you accept
with me is the relationship of union, for union is no more than this, as
we are one in being and when you have discovered relationship, we are
one in union as well. 

<sup>39.12</sup> Relationship itself is intermediary, it is what you
carry, the connection between one thing and another. In this instance it
is the connection between two individuated beings in union and
relationship.  You and me. In order for this link of relationship to
exist there must be two beings for it to link (*where two or more are
joined together*). In other words, there must be a you and a me. In
other words, as you are individuated, so too am I.  We jointly
individuate rather than separate.  We can only do this in relationship.
We can only have relationship as individuated beings.

<sup>39.13</sup> Thus, both must occur as one. 

<sup>39.14</sup> This is like the big bang, the explosion of creation.
It is all at once. All of Everything. Yet in relationship. 

<sup>39.15</sup> What must occur now must occur between you and me.
Your willingness is all that is required. 

<sup>39.16</sup> Let me tell you what has occurred in the past so that
you know not to respond to love in the same way again. 

<sup>39.17</sup> Who I have been to you is who you have been to
yourself.  Remember the idea of projection. This is what projection
does. It projects outward. It is different from extension in that
extension is like a projection that remains at one with its source.
Projection separates. 

<sup>39.18</sup> You have separated me from you through your projection.
And yet what you projected and called God, just as what you projected
and named thousands of other “things,” you separated from yourself only
in time and space. In time and space your projections became separate
and other than you. This is what the world of time and space is. A world
that is a projection that you have made, a world that has the shape and
form, the character and value, the image and meaning, that you would
give it. This is your universe. I have been, to you, the God of this
universe. 

<sup>39.19</sup> Thus your ideas of the universe and your ideas of me
have been inseparable projections. As have your ideas of the universe
and your ideas of your own self. 

<sup>39.20</sup> Have I been a benevolent God in your universe? Then you
have been benevolent and seen your universe as a benevolent universe. 

<sup>39.21</sup> Have I been a judgmental God in your universe?  Then
you have been judgmental and lived in a judgmental world. 

<sup>39.22</sup> Have I been a powerful God who can work miracles? Then
you have been a powerful miracle worker. 

<sup>39.23</sup> Have I been a distant God who does not show his love
for you or others? Then you have been distant from yourself and those
you love. 

<sup>39.24</sup> Have I been a God you have sought and never found? Then
you have not found yourself. 

<sup>39.25</sup> Have I been a fair God? Then you have been fair and the
world has treated you fairly.

<sup>39.26</sup> Have I been the God of your religion? Then you have
been religious.

<sup>39.27</sup> Have I been a God of vengeance? Then you have been
vengeful.

<sup>39.28</sup> Have I been a God of love? Then you have been loving. 

<sup>39.29</sup> Have I been all of these? So, too, then, have you, and
so too has your universe been. 

<sup>39.30</sup> Has your God not been a god at all, but science, money,
career, beauty, fame, celebrity, intellect? Then these things have
become the content of who you are. Science, money, fame, celebrity,
intellect or any other concept that has become your God can be a tough
taskmaster, or a fair friend, loving or unloving, distance you from
yourself and others or bring you closer to yourself and others. No god
who has been projected is without attributes, even gods such as these.

<sup>39.31</sup> Have you had no god, no science, no beauty, no wealth,
but only a meager and hopeless life? Then your god has been the god of
defeat.

<sup>39.32</sup> Have you had no god, no science, no career, no fame,
but only a life of hate and violence? Then your god has been the god of
bitterness.

<sup>39.33</sup> Everyone has a god because everyone has a being and an
identity for that being. Everyone carries the memory of I Am. 

<sup>39.34</sup> What memory of I Am will you carry with you now that
you know that I Am is who I am and who you are? What memory
has this Course and this Dialogue returned to you? What memory is
without attributes because it is who I Am and not a projection? Only
love. What memory is not a memory, but your identity?  Only love. 

<sup>39.35</sup> Only that which is by nature without attributes can be
one in being in union and relationship *and* individuate. Could you
become your sister or your brother? A tree become a frog? The sun the
moon? Yet love could become all of these, because love, by its nature,
has no attributes. Love is creation’s genesis, the unattributable given
the attributes of form.  

<sup>39.36</sup> Who Am I to you? Only who you are to yourself.  Now it
is time for you to be not who you have been to yourself, but who you
are, and have been, to me. 

<sup>39.37</sup> Here is where we must return to paradox, to knowing who
you are and who I Am and to constantly discovering who you are and who I
Am, because who you are and who I Am are the same being in the constant
creative tension of differentiating from one another. 

<sup>39.38</sup> This is a time of knowing who you are and who I Am
while at the same time, holding, or carrying, the mystery within you.
That mystery is the tension of opposites. It is time and eternity. Love
and hate.  Good and evil. In other words, All and Nothing. It is the
tension of individuation, a tension that has existed since the beginning
of time, *between* time and eternity, between the attributeless love and
the attribute-laden being. Between the one being of love and the many
beings of form, between love’s extension and form’s projection.

<sup>39.39</sup> This is a time of knowing you are not *on your own* but
that you must come into direct relationship with me *on your own* and of
your own free will. 

<sup>39.40</sup> All of these aspects of what stand between are also an
aspect of the Christ in you. 

<sup>39.41</sup> But breathe a sigh of relief, my beloved, for you do
not have to learn all that the Christ in you learned. This is why we
have had to enter the time of non-learning—so that you accept that you
do not have to try to learn the unlearnable. This is why we have left
the time of becoming behind, why you stand ready to enter the time of
being in union and relationship. The Christ in you is the accomplished.
The Christ in you is that which, upon this final acceptance, returns
your wholeness to you. 

<sup>39.42</sup> Realize your own expansion, the expansion that has
taken place under the tutelage of Jesus, within the dialogue with
Christ-consciousness, within the recesses of your heart where your
relationship with love has never been severed. Realize your readiness.
Proclaim your willingness. 

<sup>39.43</sup> Realize that I love your smile, your teeth, the hair
upon your head, the warm, smooth shape of your skull. Realize that I
love your hands and that as you take another’s hand, you hold my own,
and that I am with you as well as within you. Realize that I love all
that you are, and that as you snarl in anger, cry in despair, hang your
head in weariness, howl with laughter, I am with you and within you. 

<sup>39.44</sup> You will realize as you enter union by means of the
bridge of our direct relationship that you will not leave your humanity
behind. You will realize that as you enter union by means of the bridge
of our direct relationship that you will no longer see me as an inhuman
God.  You will know I am as human as are you and that you are as godly
as am I.

<sup>39.45</sup> Do not expect perfection, only union. Do not expect
sainthood, only Godhood. Do not expect the world, expect heaven. Do not
expect answers, only knowing. Do not expect learning, only revelation.
Do not expect all, without also expecting nothing. Expect to know that
you hold both within yourself and that you hold me as I hold you.  

<sup>39.46</sup> You will realize as you enter union that the tension of
opposites *is* the individuation process and that you are the bridge.
You are the bridge to me. I am the bridge to you. You are the bridge to
your brothers and sisters. They are your bridge to yourself. You will
also be the bridge between war and peace, sadness and joy, evil and
good, sickness and health. You will turn anger to gladness, tears to
laughter, and replace weariness with rest. But you will still *know* all
of these.  You will *know* the All of Everything and the emptiness of
nothing and our *relationship* will bridge the distance and become cause
and effect, means and end. 

<sup>39.47</sup> You will realize that as we individuate we are in a
constant state of creation as well as of creative tension. As we become
individuated beings in union and relationship, we continuously create
one another. We create from the field of the possible which must include
everything. 

<sup>39.48</sup> Do you not realize yet, that this is what we do and who
we are?  That we are creators? That we think, feel, know, and *create*.
Creation is the manifestation of all we think, feel, know and come to
know. Because we are constantly creating, we are constantly coming to
know anew. This is eternity. A being in time wants to be known in time
but can only be known in eternity. You now are the bridge between time
and eternity.

<sup>39.49</sup> And so am I. As the Christ in you ceases to be a
bridge, the Christ in you is not only integrated into you but integrated
into me. I could no more reach across time and space without this
relationship than could you. Only with our willingness joined, are we
able to negate the need for intermediaries and be in relationship. Only
with our willingness joined do we both become, welcome, and share, the
Christ relationship to and with each other. 

<sup>39.50</sup> This is who I know you to be and who you, in union with
me, know me to be.

