---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "34"
title: "Day 34: Saying Yes to Power"
---

<sup>34.1</sup> Power is of creation, not of destruction. Yet creation
and destruction are two sides of the same continuum as are hot and cold,
darkness and light. Seeing in wholeness includes seeing the opposites
that seem to exist at these two ends of the same spectrum. If the new
way of seeing the Self just spoken of—seeing the Self as *being* in
relationship—is key to creating a new world, how does this relate to the
seeming opposite of creation? How does this new way of seeing relate to
destruction? Does creation of the new have to include destruction of the
old? 

<sup>34.2</sup> Creation simply does include destruction in much the
same way *all* includes *nothing*. Without relationship, *all* and
*nothing* are the same. In relationship, the difference between all and
nothing is everything. So too is it with creation and destruction.
Without relationship, creation and destruction are the same. In
relationship, the difference between creation and destruction is
everything.

<sup>34.3</sup> Relationship is needed to create difference. However,
relationship with everything creates sameness—or the very oneness in
being that we have been talking about. 

<sup>34.4</sup> The wholehearted desire that is upon you now is the
desire to know and experience this oneness of being in relationship
rather than the difference of being in relationship—the wholeness of
being in relationship rather than the separation of being in
relationship. 

<sup>34.5</sup> This wholehearted desire can be fulfilled in you—it is
being fulfilled in you. As it is fulfilled in you, you will create a new
world—a world based on sameness rather than difference. You have faced
and admitted your willingness to leave striving for specialness and
differences behind. Now you need only realize that your wholehearted
desire has made it so and begin to see and create this change in the
world around you. 

<sup>34.6</sup> This is your world and your experience. This is your
life and your experience of life. Now you must believe that you are its
creator and powerful in your relationship to it. 

<sup>34.7</sup> If *you* do not make real your power, *you* will
experience yourself as powerless. If you experience your being as
powerless, you are negating the power of God who is one in being with
you. 

<sup>34.8</sup> Thus we continue to draw to the close of our time
together by asking each other to experience our power—the power of
sameness of being. Are you willing to experience the power of God? To
let it flow through you? Realize how many have said no to this request.
Realize the importance and the power of your willingness to say yes.

