---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "31"
title: "Day 31: Joining"
---

<sup>31.1</sup> Joining is both about union and about relationship. Let
us consider this by considering the two levels of experience—that of the
mountain top experience—and that of the experience on level ground. 

<sup>31.2</sup> While you have been immersed in one level of experience
you have been either knower or known. This is why experience has seemed
to exist apart from you. You say, “I had this experience” or “I had that
experience,” as if you have “had” contact and interaction with
circumstances or events that are separate from the Self. In saying this,
you express your realization of relationship but no realization of the
unity in which relationship exists. You “know” the experience because
you have “had” the experience.  The truth that you are the experience
escapes you. 

<sup>31.3</sup> What the mountain top experience is helping you to see
is that you *are* the experience. The mountain top experience did not
happen to you or happen separately from you. It has happened and is
happening *within* you.  You are the experience and the experiencer, the
knower and the known.  This joining is the point of the experience and
the key to *experiencing* wholeness. 

<sup>31.4</sup> As has already been stated, wholeness could not be
*experienced* without division. Wholeness and oneness are the same. You
are one in being with your Father, your Creator, the originator and
denominator of life.

<sup>31.5</sup> To have experienced only separation is to have known
only half of any experience, to have seen every experience in only one
dimension—in short, to have seen experience as happening to you rather
than as you.  By realizing the unity of the relationship in which
experience becomes manifest, you not only realize oneness, but realize
that you are a creator and that you always have been. 

<sup>31.6</sup> All experience is a product of knower and knowee. It is
the One Self knowing itself as one individuated Self. 

<sup>31.7</sup> Joining is differentiated from union only by experience.
Union is the realm of the One. Joining is where the realm of the One
unites with the realm of the many. In each of the many is the One—the
common denominator. By knowing the One in the many, experience can be
achieved within wholeness. 

<sup>31.8</sup> The beginning of this knowing occurs within, with the
knowing, or experiencing, of the One within the individuated Self.
Notice the link here of knowing and experiencing. To know experience as
the Self is to know the Self as creator, or in other words, to know the
One Self within the individuated Self. To know the One Self within the
individuated Self is to join the two. The two are thus joined in the
relationship of experience. Experience is not known separately from the
Self. Self and God are one and experiencing together in wholeness. For
the individuated Self to experience separately from God is to negate the
purpose of the experience of the Self which is God.  To negate is to
deny what is. The denial of what is is the source of separation. The
acceptance of what is is the Source of union and the ability to
experience in wholeness.

