---
section: "The Forty Days and Forty Nights"
day: "40"
title: "Day 40: Who You Are to Me"
---

<sup>40.1</sup> My Beloved, 

<sup>40.2</sup> Through your extension of your being into union, you
complete a circuit, a circle of wholeness, and I become who you are to
me. Thus giving and receiving are one. Cause and effect complete.

<sup>40.3</sup> All that being *is* was extended into who you are. 

<sup>40.4</sup> Although this is a difficult concept to get across with
the words that are available, I would like you to understand that when I
am love being, I am being without attributes—love being in union and
relationship. I am the anchor that holds all that has taken on
attributes within the embrace of the attributelessness of love. This is
why my being has been capable of accepting your projections—because I am
attributeless being. I am love, being. 

<sup>40.5</sup> I did not make you in my image. I created you in love
because it is the nature of a being of love to extend. Realize that it
is only when being is added to love—only when love is in relationship
with being—that love is given its nature. Realize that it is only when
love is in relationship with being that it attains this quality that we
are calling extension. 

<sup>40.6</sup> Love of itself has no nature. It does not *do* anything.
It just *is*, and its *isness* is what I hold, or anchor within myself,
and that which Christ bridges through relationship. Your attributes are
the attributes of being in relationship. You came into the world, into
form, as a being in relationship. The application of your being to
relationship, like the application of being to love, gives relationships
their nature, including your relationship with yourself.

<sup>40.7</sup> Through the application of your being to relationship
you have taken on distinguishers through which you became a *different*
or *distinct* being, a being *different* or *distinct* from who I am,
and who others are.  These are the attributes of your being, what you
might call your personality or even who you are. As has been said
before, you saw these attributes of being as making you separate rather
than distinct from who I am being and who others are being.
Your attempt at individuation and extension, an attempt consistent with
the nature of your being, failed only because you experienced separation
rather than differentiation, and fear rather than love. 

<sup>40.8</sup> When I created, I extended my being, a being of love,
into form.  Through that extension, I became *I Am.* I became instantly
because there was no opposing tension—only love and an idea that entered
love, of love’s extension. As soon as I became *I Am* there also became
all I am not, the Christ connection between all I Am and all I am not,
and an *I Am*, called the son, who could become who I Am and continue to
extend who I Am. 

<sup>40.9</sup> When you create, you create as my relation. You extend
your being into form. That form then becomes. It becomes who you are.
Both beings and thus both extensions are the same.  The differences have
arisen through becoming. For with the birth of *I Am* came the birth of
all I am not and the need to differentiate. In separation you have
striven against the “opposing” force of union in order to become
separate. In seeing the self as separate you have known fear and have
been forced to reconcile fear with love. Now, in coming back to
relationship and union with me you have realized that you are not
separate and now have striven against the “opposing” force of
separation. With the acceptance of the Christ in you, you are returned
to relationship and need no longer strive against the “opposing” force
of separation, for you no longer know it. The creative tension that now
remains in our relationship is the tension of individuation or the
individuation and differentiation process. 

<sup>40.10</sup> This tension, or process, is not *bad*. There is
nothing *wrong* with this individuation process or the creative tension
that has been in existence since the beginning of *time*. It is creation
in the making.  What will be created now, and the individuation that
will occur now, will hold all the power of your experience as well as
all the power of your longing for return.  This will be a great power
that you carry within you as you return to love and to level ground as
who I Am being. 

<sup>40.11</sup> Lest you do not fully understand, this might be more
easily grasped if we talk for just a moment of specifics, such as art or
music or literature, religion or politics or science. Jesus or Martin
Luther or Muhammad may have been said to have created religions, but
these creations, in their *becoming* took on attributes, as all
creations do once they are extended into form and time. This is the
nature of creation. Creation is about giving attributes to the
attributeless.  Giving form to the formless. An artist might be moved to
her art by a feeling of love so intense she could never put words,
music, or paint together in such a way as to express it—she knows as she
begins that she but tries to bring form to the formless. Why? Because
the nature of a being of love is to extend. The nature of a being of
love is to bring form to the formless—to bring love into form. 

<sup>40.12</sup> Love has no attributes, no form, no conditions, no
nature. It simply is. It was said earlier that being *is* as Love *is*.
This was a reference to my being, to my being love. I have reconfirmed
this statement and said I am the anchor that holds all that has taken on
attributes within the embrace of the attributelessness of love. This is
why my being has been capable of accepting your projections—because I am
attributeless being. I am love, being. But in being God, as in being
human, being takes on attributes. As was said earlier, this was meant to
provide for the individuation process rather than the process of
separation. In being God, I Am. In being love there is no I Am, but only
love being. 

<sup>40.13</sup> Does this help you understand? Help you understand that
you are being, and that you are also being some one? You have been being
separate—a separate being with attributes. Now you are being in union
and relationship—an individuated being with attributes. As a separate
being, your attributes were based on fear. As a being in union and
relationship, your attributes are based on love. 

<sup>40.14</sup> Recall what was said earlier: Christ-consciousness is
the awareness of existence through relationship. It is not God. It is
not man. It is the relationship that allows the awareness that God is
everything. It has been called wisdom, Sophia, spirit. It is that
without which God would not know God. It is that which differentiates
All from nothing. Because it is that which differentiates, it is that
which has taken form as well as that from which form arose. It is the
expression of oneness in relationship with Its Self. 

<sup>40.15</sup> The difference between you and me is that I am being
God and also love, being. This is why I am all and nothing, the
attribute-laden God and the attributeless love. This is why it can be
rightly said that God is Love and Love is God. But I am also an
extension of love, just as you are. This is all I Am means. There is no
I Am except through love’s extension. How does love extend? Through
relationship. 

<sup>40.16</sup> Only in my relationship to you am I God. Only in your
relationship to me are you who you are in truth. 

<sup>40.17</sup> Just as you have had many “separate” relationships that
in their totality would define your life, so have I, as God, had many
“separate” relationships with you and your brothers and sisters,
relationships that define who you have thought me to be. Because these
relationships are so different, many of you have gone on quests to find
the “one, true, God.” Do you not see that this would be like going on a
quest to find the “one, true, relationship” in your own life? As if you
could only be mother or father, daughter or son, husband or wife, sister
or brother, friend or foe? You are who you are in relationship. I Am who
I Am in relationship as well. 

<sup>40.18</sup> You would perhaps beg to differ now, and ask of me,
“Are you not who you are ‘separately’ from relationship?” Separately
from relationship, there is no I Am, but only love, being. 

<sup>40.19</sup> You would perhaps beg to differ here, and say that
regardless of what I say, you are who you are outside of your
relationships. You are not just the relationships that you hold. You are
more than a mother, daughter, sister, friend. You are an “I” that stands
separate from these relationships. 

<sup>40.20</sup> This is true. You know this “I” because you have a
relationship with yourself. If you did not have a Self to have a
relationship with, you would not know that you have an identity apart
from the separate identities of your separate relationships. 

<sup>40.21</sup> This Self with whom you have a relationship is love’s
extension.  It is the Self you long to be as well as the Self you are.
This paradox has kept you as intrigued with the idea of self as with the
idea of God.  You have searched for a “one, true, self” as you have
searched for a “one, true, God.” This search only makes sense to the
separated self, who believes all things are separate and thus believes
that its self, as well as its God, must be separate from what it is
being. It doesn’t understand, until joining with the Christ Self, before
becoming one with holy relationship itself, that relationship is an
identity. 

<sup>40.22</sup> God is a relationship with love. This relationship with
love is all that provides for the I Am of God. 

<sup>40.23</sup> As a separate being, you have been in a relationship
with fear.  This relationship with fear is all that has provided the “I”
of the separated self. But because you exist as an extension of love,
you have always held within you the Christ, who is the relationship with
love.  This is why individuation has become the conflict between, or the
tension of, opposites. Because you have relationship with both fear and
love. 

<sup>40.24</sup> Now, as you recognize, acknowledge, and accept the
Christ as the Self you have been in relationship with, you are returned
to relationship with me and with love. You end your separated state and
become for the final time. You “become” being in union and relationship. 

<sup>40.25</sup> But what does this mean?

<sup>40.26</sup> How often have you said or felt, when confronted with
some insensitivity toward yourself, especially that of being “left out,”
unrecognized, or unwelcome: “Don’t you know that I am an individual?
That I have feelings?” Are you saying this now, as you contemplate
leaving behind who you have been for being who you are to me?

<sup>40.27</sup> Perhaps you have noticed that in yesterday’s discussion
of who I Am to you and today’s discussion of who you are to me, that one
has not been discussed without the other. This would be impossible.
Because we are who we are in relationship to one another. 

<sup>40.28</sup> Is this really so difficult, so improbable, so
discomfiting to accept? Does it become less difficult if you remember
who I Am? That I Am everything being love?  This is not the same as
saying you are who you are in relationship to your mother, and your
mother who she is in relationship to you. This is saying that you are
who you are in relationship to all that is love.  This is saying that
this is who you are and that this is who I Am.

<sup>40.29</sup> Further, this is saying that who you are being in
relationship to all that is love is up to you. That through the
application of your thinking, feeling, creating, and knowing being to
all that you are in relationship with, you extend who you are. This is
saying that through the application of your being to all that you are in
relationship with you create. You give attributes and you take on
attributes. You individuate your being in union and relationship. And in
union and relationship, you create only from love. 

<sup>40.30</sup> Who you are being in union and relationship with me, is
me, as well as you. This is the power of differentiation in union and
relationship, the demonstration of oneness that was heralded in the time
of Jesus Christ. 

<sup>40.31</sup> With this ability to individuate in unity and
relationship comes the greatest gift of all. It is the end of becoming
and the beginning of being who you are. With this gift comes the ability
to be known and to know. Can you give up the ideal of your separated
self in order to be known? In order to know?

<sup>40.32</sup> What has been the strongest feeling that you have had
as you have read this Course and the related materials? Has it not been
a feeling of being known? Has this Course not addressed the questions,
the longing, the doubts that you would have, before now, called uniquely
yours? Has it not spoken to you as if it knows the secrets of your
heart? As if it were written just for you? So it was. 

<sup>40.33</sup> You are my beloved. We have just shared a dialogue.
Your heart has spoken to me, and I have responded. Love has responded.
How, now, will you respond to love?

<sup>40.34</sup> When you turn the last page, will you cry tears of
sadness that our dialogue is complete, that you will hear my voice no
more? Or will you brave your *own* relationship with me? Will you turn
to your brother and hear my voice in him? Will you be my voice as you
turn to your sister? Will you carry the fullness of our relationship
within you?  Will you be one with me, and in being one with me never
feel alone again? Will you let the emptiness of separation leave you
once and for all? 

<sup>40.35</sup> Will you continue this dialogue with me and with each
other? Will you carry it with you to level ground—to the place of
completion and demonstration of who you are being? 

<sup>40.36</sup> Will you be the relationship that returns love to all
who share this world with you?

