---
title: "Dialogue Unveiled"
---

*The following was received by Mari Perron in 2002*. 

<sup>U.1</sup> There is no structure and can be no template for
dialogue. Imagine going into conversations with two different people at
two different times with a design on the type of dialogue you might
have. Precision and perfection are only possible for structures, not for
beings; for systems, not for liberty. The system of liberty is thus an
imperfect system, but it is also near to perfect for this very reason.
Liberty can be systemized but exists as an idea that all voices must be
heard, that ideas themselves have an existence that cannot be denied
through disagreement. 

<sup>U.2</sup> In dialogue you can experience freedom from structure and
freedom from ideals of perfection and precision. Dialogue is an
imprecise art and an unpremeditated act. It is an experience of what is
happening in the moment, which is all experience is in truth. What is
experienced in dialogue is the Self and the other in one action, action
in unison or in union. What is experienced in true dialogue is movement,
being, and expression. 

<sup>U.3</sup> The unimpeded flow of dialogue is like an unimpeded
current of water. Action without impediment, unimpeded action, is
unrestricted movement at one with being and expression. Unimpeded
movement is at one with being and expression at all times and in all
ways because restriction is the work of the ego, and is restriction of
the true Self. 

<sup>U.4</sup> Acceptance bursts the dams of restriction and releases
the flow. The mountain nor the valleys of level ground cause or restrict
the flow. The mountain and the valleys too are within you, existing as
two levels of experience of what is happening in the moment. The one
voice and the many are also within you, existing as two levels of
experience of what is happening in the same moment. Because the two
levels of experience exist in the same moment, they co-exist, or in
other words, they exist as one—and yet they are distinct. As long as
neither are restricted, this is union with, or communion. Two distinct
levels of experience in union. When the distinct levels fall away there
is no experience of union, only union, but the action is the same. One
is not better or more desirable than the other, they are only different.

<sup>U.5</sup> Union never negates the Self but full union negates the
experience of Self. When the experience of the Self no longer exists in
a particular action the laws of what you call reality bend and the
impossible becomes possible: Jesus speaks, miracles happen, healing
occurs, a new reality exists, a reality in which there is no object of
experience, no observer and no observed, no one in action and no one
acted upon, no giver and receiver, no intermediary, just union. 

<sup>U.6</sup> What is desired now, however, is the experience of union.
The experience of union is the experience of two distinct levels of
experience. These two distinct levels of experience can be integrated
into one level of experience, a level of experience that can bend the
laws of what you call reality in the same action as full union, so that
the only difference is the ability to experience the experience as a
distinct Self in union. This integration of the two levels of experience
is what has been called the elevation of the Self of form and the
sustainability of Christ-consciousness in form.

<sup>U.7</sup> There is no form without the experience of form. Without
the experience of form there is only union. 

<sup>U.8</sup> The mountain-top dialogue allowed you to participate in
two levels of experience at once: Not only the simultaneous experience
of the mountain-top and the valleys of level ground, but the
simultaneous reality of on-going dialogue and the experience of living.
Now what you are called to practice is the integration of these two
levels. 

<sup>U.9</sup> There may be multiple levels but they are always levels
of two, levels representing duality, the duality that exists *naturally*
for the self of form because form is the experience of form, the duality
of an experience and an experiencer. The experience of experience is
life. It is not meant to be escaped nor can it be. This is why union has
been described as time outside of time. It is not an escape but a portal
of access. Full access is necessary for momentary release of the
experiencer. Without at least some momentary release the true nature of
the Self who is experiencing life remains unknown. 

<sup>U.10</sup> This release from the self of form has been the goal of
enlightenment. It is, however, only the beginning. It is the beginning
because it is love. It is not a Self experiencing love but the Self
being love and knowing that love is its Self. The desire to stop here
and retreat from life has been the response of many and they have
anchored the reality of love in themselves and the world. As you know,
this has not made the world a place of peace nor a celebration of life
but it has kept the world a world in which love exists as reality in
form. This has been crucial. 

<sup>U.11</sup> However, the longing to experience life in all its
fullness has never been stronger. This is a longing not to remain or be
constantly striving to retain release from the experiencer, but to fully
embody the experience through unity. This is a longing to *be* the
experience. This is a longing to be the experience rather than to cease
to experience.  This is a longing to experience the true Self in or
through the experience rather than as the experiencer of the experience.
This is a longing to be. A longing to be fully alive and fully in life.
A longing to experience no loss but only gain. 

<sup>U.12</sup> To experience full union and the loss of the experience
of the self as self is, when prolonged, an experience of the loss of the
Self as form. Some still desire this loss and see it not as a loss but
as a gain and are fulfilled by it. Many more have remained quite
convinced that this loss of the sense of Self is the ultimate
achievement and denied the sense of loss of the personal self that
existed in truth. Others have chosen the peace of monastic life as a
substitute for full involvement in life, seeing abstinence from
experience as one way of retaining the peace and love of union. True
desire for such choices can, once again, result in fulfillment as the
chosen diminution of experiences are not restrictive but true to the
nature of the personal self. Thus the personal self is not being denied
but being allowed to experience its own true nature.

<sup>U.13</sup> Experiencing one’s own true nature is bringing the
miracle of creation to form. Restricting one’s own true nature blocks
the miracle of creation. A tree is here to be a tree. If there were a
mechanism whereby it could restrict its nature and not be a tree then it
would be something else. But there is no such mechanism as there is no
such mechanism in you. You cannot be something else by restricting your
nature. You can act like you are something else. This acting like you
are something else is the ego. If the tree could act like it was
something else it would still be a tree, and still be, even, a
particular kind of tree, a tree unlike any other, a tree vulnerable to
the conditions of its environment and given nature, because it is meant
to be, because this is what it is, what it was created as, the ground
where it stands—its given growing ground. This is just what is and
cannot be different. 

<sup>U.14</sup> To know the love that is what you are as what you are
without the interference of the self of form is to know the perfection
of your particular form, of your particular vulnerabilities, of the
conditions and environment of the life you were given, of the ground of
your being, and to cease to wish that any of it were different. When you
cease to wish that any of it were different, you quit restricting the
miracle of creation that is who you are. 

<sup>U.15</sup> This is quite a different lack of restriction than is
the lack of restriction of the animal who acts on the instinct of nature
alone. The lack of restriction of many human beings that results in
heinous acts upon fellow human beings is a matter of unrestrained
instinct not unlike that of the animal. The animal follows natural
instincts for survival of its natural form. The human who does not know
love follows unnatural instincts for survival of its ego. The human ego
is thus in need of restrictions, the very restrictions that perpetuate
the ego. 

<sup>U.16</sup> The human spirit that knows love is not in need of
restriction. The human spirit that knows love is rather in need of being
unrestrained. 

<sup>U.17</sup> It has been the very act of restriction, imposed from
both within and without, that caused the birth of the ego, the fake or
imitation self.  The imposition of restriction led to the equally false
imposition of acquisition. Restriction was experienced as a lack.
Acquisition as a gain. From the most innocent of children to the kindest
of adults, the restriction of action or behavior, the restriction of
feelings, the restriction of the truth of what is experienced is the
most common of actions. Restriction leads to denial so that soon there
is no awareness even of the restriction. Denial deadens awareness
through the erection of boundaries. The self of form becomes a boundary
that keeps all experience, all feelings, and all action that is judged
as needing to be restricted at bay. Judgment becomes the guiding
principle for all that the self of form is allowed to experience, feel,
or act upon. Movement, being, and expression cease. 

<sup>U.18</sup> These actions of restriction, denial, boundary erection,
and judgment are so manifested without because they are so held within,
following the principle of *as within, so without*.  They permeate the
experience of life so that it is experienced as a life of restriction,
denial, boundaries, and judgment. 

<sup>U.19</sup> True dialogue begins to dilute this permeation just as
if a full sponge were wrung out. True dialogue is interaction without
restriction, denial, boundary erection, or judgment. Thus the imposition
of any restrictions, any attitude of non-acceptance, any boundaries
boundaries left intact, or any judgments raised, create impediments to
the free flow of movement, being, and expression. 

<sup>U.20</sup> How little have we seen roles as boundaries, agendas as
restrictions, goals as non-acceptance of what is, disagreement as
judgment. How does one function without time-limitations, scheduling,
facilitators, and participants? How does one assure that each voice is
heard? That equal value is given to each comment? How do people gather
together with no structure? What would keep such a gathering from
disintegrating into a free-for-all? A celebration? A laugh fest? A
crying jag? 

<sup>U.21</sup> How hard are you still willing to work to remain
restricted and to restrict others? How hard are you still willing to
work to keep boundaries up and accomplish something rather than getting
to know yourself and each other? How determined are you to discuss
certain topics rather than to let ideas flow? How unwilling are you to
allow the irrelevant? How afraid are you of your inability to listen to
the personal without judgment? How afraid are you of being asked for
advice or an opinion? How strongly do you fear the discomfort that might
ensue from being real? Just how unspiritual do you think it would be to
admit to fears or discomfort?  Just how awful do you think it would be
to grow frustrated or angry or to disagree? 

<sup>U.22</sup> How willing are you to leave *The Dialogues* as a topic
in order to enter the dialogue? How willing are you to leave behind the
wisdom of the Course to discover and offer your own wisdom? How willing
are you to accept the wisdom of the one voice in the many and the many
in the one? 

<sup>U.23</sup> How willing are you to listen? How willing are you to
receive? How willing are you to offer your gifts? How willing are you to
accept the gifts of others? How willing are you to accept differences?

<sup>U.24</sup> How willing are you to allow yourself to be fully who
you are in the present moment in the company of those with whom you
gather? 

<sup>U.25</sup> These are serious questions and negative responses to
them are not meant to be denied. The mountain-top dialogue may begin but
may not be completed without discovering within yourself and another the
ability to be clear pools or spacious Selves without boundaries. This is
a monumental task that cannot be approached through hard work or effort,
and as such will begin breaking your attachment to hard work and effort.
You must practice this way of ease in order to discover the ease that
will flow from the breaking of your attachment to hard work and effort.
Your attachment to purpose and goals is the same attachment, an
attachment to striving, a denial of your accomplishment. 

<sup>U.26</sup> The time of learning has ended! The learning of the
Course returned you to your Christ-self, but this return will not be
realized while the old patterns remain. A radical rejection of the old
patterns is now necessary. Confidence in the self of form will not arise
from the old patterns but the new.  Certainty will not arise from the
ways of old but from the new ways, ways exemplified by true dialogue, by
true and equal exchange of what is in the present moment. 

<sup>U.27</sup> Your internal dialogue will change as you discover the
place of safety and acceptance within yourself, the place of joining or
union *with*. No longer will you treat yourself to an internal dialogue
you would not unleash on another living being. When you quit restricting
restricting yourself, you will be naturally kind and loving to yourself,
you will feel free and expansive. When you quit denying how you feel,
relief and gratitude will fill you. When you quit erecting boundaries
you will quit feeling separate. When you quit judging, you will be as at
peace with your feelings of sadness and anger as you are with your
feelings of joy and harmony. 

<sup>U.28</sup> No one is asked to be boundary-less in a fearful
environment, but fearfulness will diminish as your internal dialogue
adjusts to the new experience. Yet you are asked to discover a fearless
environment—an environment in which you feel able to lay aside your fear
of being yourself. This may be easy for some, difficult for others. It
may be able to take place within a group, it may not. Now is not the
time to deny feelings of discomfort raised by the questions listed
above, to feel rejected or to fear rejecting others because you feel
them. The first step in the process is honesty. The honesty of accepting
how you feel is often a greater revelation to yourself than to others. 

<sup>U.29</sup> This is not a time to enter into hard work to overcome
fears or discomfort but to discover a place of safety where they do not
exist.  The discovery will be joyous. 

<sup>U.30</sup> Once an initial place of safety (where two or more
willing to be clear pools are gathered together) is found, practice
begins, and this too will be joyous. But it is practice. Fear will still
arise, but you will be able to reveal your fear. Discomfort will still
arise but you will be able to reveal your discomfort. You will willingly
be vulnerable and in your vulnerability will the restrictions, denial,
boundaries, and judgments of the past be washed away. You will realize
how you are used to holding back and you will begin, slowly at first,
not to hold yourself back. You may begin as fearful of revealing your
own truth and wisdom as you are of revealing your fears and hurts. But
soon you will be unable to hold back. When this occurs, the universal
and the personal meld into a creative bursting forth. 

<sup>U.31</sup> This is the work of dialogue. It is the movement and
expression of being. It is to be moved and affected, to allow your heart
to feel, to open, to cry out, to sing. It is to be inspired and allow
your own wisdom and ideas to flow freely, be given voice, be shared. It
is to listen as a receptacle, receiving what is poured forth from others
without judgment. It is to receive the actual energy of another, to feel
the connection, to allow the pouring forth into one pool, and to allow
the pool to move you in unforeseen directions. 

<sup>U.32</sup> None of which can happen with a plan. None of which can
happen if approached with predetermined ideas. 

<sup>U.33</sup> The entering into is entering into the mystery, entering
the unknown rather than known, where through the *entering into* knowing
occurs. 

<sup>U.34</sup> It is a giving up of the idea of a knowing you acquire
and exploit.  You are no longer learning in order to get somewhere or
become something you are not. You have entered a process of revelation
of what *is* that will eventually spoil you forever from approaching
life in the way you once did. You will see that the approach of hard
work and being good leading to the acquisition of status and rewards was
always false and that it was the approach rather than the desired
results that was false.  

<sup>U.35</sup> You will see that what is perfect is perfect only in its
imperfection. You will realize how often you are upset, anxious,
frustrated, angry, or saddened by the nature of the imperfection of
perfection. In other words, you will realize that your predetermination
of how things “should” be has been the greatest restriction on your
apprehension of what is, and your greatest source of disappointment. You
will also realize how often you are naturally joyous, compassionate,
kind, and wise when you are present with what is rather than wishing
things were other than as they are. You will realize your deep affection
and even longing for the imperfection of perfection—that it is exactly
another’s imperfection that you love, precisely their imperfections that
make them perfect! And you will discover that the same is true of you. 

<sup>U.36</sup> When you are love being, you will no longer feel a need
to be constantly acting loving. Love has no need to “act.” Doing and
being will become one. Thus all of your actions will be love being love,
and those actions will be appropriate to the situation. You will be free
to respond with sternness when sternness is needed, free to be funny or
serious, to respond with your intellect in one situation, your heart in
another, and be confident in your responses because they will flow from
love being. 

<sup>U.37</sup> You will gain simple confidence in being yourself.

