---
title: "Epilogue: A Note on Being"
---

<sup>E.1</sup> Ah, imagine now what it will be like to have nothing left
to learn, nothing left to become. The pressure is off. The alchemy has
occurred.  The coal has become a diamond. Ah, imagine now being able to
forget all ideas of self-improvement, imagine how much time will be
saved by this quest coming to an end. But what now will you do? What now
will you be?

<sup>E.2</sup> Believe it or not, you will find these questions arise
less and less until soon, and very soon, they will be entirely gone,
never to be asked again. Why? Because now that you are being who you are
in unity and relationship, these questions will make no sense to you.
They already have far less power. Can you not feel it? The questions
remain only as questions of the old patterns of thought, patterns that
you need only be aware of before choosing to have them gone from you.
This is the only choice you will still have to make—the choice to leave
behind the old in order to *be*. 

<sup>E.3</sup> You are in relationship now only with love, and so
nothing will be hard for you. Desire an old pattern to be gone and it
will be gone. This little note added to the end of our mountain top time
together is only here to help you realize and accept that this will be
so. Do not expect difficulties and they will not arise. 

<sup>E.4</sup> You have returned to your true nature. Perhaps you will
remember that within *A Course of Love* you were once asked to “Imagine
the ocean or the cheetah, the sun or the moon or God Himself, attempting
to learn what they are.  They are the same as you. All exist within you.
You are the universe itself.” 

<sup>E.5</sup> You are returned to your natural Self, and as you begin
to move more fully back into your life, you will realize where the
differences between this natural Self and your former self lie. You will
realize that you know what to do. You will realize that there is no
“will be.” That you are and that you will respond as easily to your
surroundings as does the cheetah to his. 

<sup>E.6</sup> This little note is just included to tell you to expect
this. Expect heaven on earth you were told. This is what it is. There
will be no doubt, no indecision. Your path will be so clear to you it
will be as if it is the only path in the world and you will wonder why
you didn’t see it all along. Expect this.  And it will be. So be it. 

<sup>E.7</sup> There is no becoming. As you are no longer becoming there
will be no becoming projected from you onto the world.  There will be no
projections at all and this is why you will see so clearly. You will see
what is. You will create what will be through the extension of love.
This is all. So be it. 

<sup>E.8</sup> You no longer have a universe of projection to maintain
but a universe of love to enjoy and a universe of love to create. So be
it. 

<sup>E.9</sup> For as long as you know that what I am telling you is
true, for as long as you carry this knowing within yourself, this is how
long the eternity of being will be for you.  There is no one to turn out
the lights but you. Drift from knowing to unknowing, close your eyes,
and you can experience the stillness of not knowing, the rest and
calmness of nothingness. You can experience non-being and in a similar
fashion, drift as gently and as your own desire arises, into all-being.
Mainly you will enjoy being—being who you are. You will be happy. You
will be content. And you will know, unerringly, how to act naturally
from your being. 

<sup>E.10</sup> You can do everything you did before, or nothing you did
before, all with the total confidence of being. You need not worry about
this joy being selfish for there is no such thing in unity. You will
share your joy continuously just by sharing yourself. 

<sup>E.11</sup> You will not realize that everything has changed until
you “realize” or “make real” that change. Let this revelation come to
you.  All you need do is expect it to come and it will come. So be it. 

<sup>E.12</sup> You will also not realize that you have chosen nothing
until and unless you realize that everything has not changed.  Let this
realization come too if it must. And make a new choice. The future is up
to you. 

<sup>E.13</sup> What you “realize” now you truly “make real” as your
being applies love’s extension to all with whom you are in relationship. 

<sup>E.14</sup> You will no longer need to “think” about who you are and
what you will do, and your willingness to give up this thinking will be
paramount to your realization that everything has changed or that
nothing has changed. 

<sup>E.15</sup> These are both possibilities, as all possibilities are
yours. Which do you choose? 

<sup>E.16</sup> There is no longer an in-between unless you create it.
You have taken the step of accepting the relationship of the between,
the relationship of Christ, into your own being. The cooperative
relationship of all with everything abides within you now. You do not,
and cannot decide what to do with it, you can only be it. This is the
choice you have made. To be. So be it.

<sup>E.17</sup> You do not as yet think you know how to just be, and
this is why, in a sense, this dialogue, in this form, must come to an
end. The dialogue you will carry forward with you, with your realization
of being, will be a different dialogue. 

<sup>E.18</sup> This dialogue has been your final quest. It is the final
quest in the quest for being because the quest has been accomplished,
fulfilled, completed. 

<sup>E.19</sup> Leave these words behind now, and bring only the
dialogue with you.  You will unerringly find those who can engage in the
new dialogue, those who have chosen the new, those who seek to share and
exchange in harmony. Thus will you begin and your numbers increase. 

<sup>E.20</sup> Do not be afraid now to be who you are. Do not think you
need to be something different, something other than you have been.
Leave all thinking behind. Leave all notions of being better, smarter,
kinder, more loving behind. Realize that these were all thoughts and
notions of becoming. If you hang on to them, your being will not have
the chance to realize and make real its being. You will be different,
only if you allow and will yourself to realize and make real this
difference. It is a difference between becoming and being. It is all the
difference in the world. It is the difference between separation and
differentiation in union and relationship. 

<sup>E.21</sup> This difference, if you will allow it to come, will take
away all worry, all thought about how you could be better, more,
greater. If you still possess some things that you would consider
character flaws or faults, forget about them now. In being they will be
yours or they will not. You will be happy that you have these aspects of
humanness or you will not and they will be gone. Do not expect the same
unhappiness with yourself. You are fine.  You are being. You are being
fine. So be it. 

<sup>E.22</sup> If you will but let it come, you will see that you are
being who you are being for a reason, for a purpose, a purpose that will
be so clear to you that you will joyously accept yourself for who you
are being. So be it. 

<sup>E.23</sup> It will be possible for you, for a while, to drift
between being and becoming if you are not vigilant of your thought
processes. This will not take long, however, to overcome, for once you
have begun to realize that everything is different, you will not desire
to turn back, not even for the familiar thought processes that, although
they have bedeviled you, you have held dear. 

<sup>E.24</sup> When you meet what you would have before seen as
difficulties, as you encounter a world where love still does not seem to
reign, when you meet that which would oppose love, remember that you are
now the bridge between this creative tension of opposites becoming one.
Remember that this is creation in the making. Remember that you are a
creator. Never forget that in being who I Am being, you extend only
love. 

<sup>E.25</sup> This one note, this tone, this canticle of joy, this
celebratory alleluia, is all you need return to, all you need keep in
hand should doubt arise. This one note is so full of love, so powerful,
that it will be dear to you forever more. 

<sup>E.26</sup> You will remember, just briefly, as you re-read it, in
your quickly passing times of doubt, how different you are. You will
recall with poignancy who you once were, but you will not turn back. You
will know that all turning back would be but a retracing of the circular
route you have traveled from yourself to yourself. 

<sup>E.27</sup> What will there be to strive for? What quest will
replace this quest for being? The quest for love’s expression—the quest
to see, experience, and share, as many of love’s expressions as the
world needs to be returned, along with you, to its own Self. 

<sup>E.28</sup> Does this seem like a long and harrowing road? An
endless quest? An endless quest for love’s expression is eternity
itself. 

<sup>E.29</sup> Be happy that there is no end in sight to this road you
travel now.  It is simply the road of what is endlessly creating like
unto itself. 

<sup>E.30</sup> You now know how to respond to love, for you are love,
being. So be it.

