---
title: "Learning in the Time of Christ&mdash;Part Three"
---

<sup>A.35</sup> Beyond the coursework of the Treatises lies direct
relationship—direct relationship with me. Entering the dialogue is the
way this is expressed; yet this is not merely about entering spoken
dialogue. As was said in “A Treatise on the Art of Thought,” “Creation
is but a dialogue to which you have not responded.” 

<sup>A.36</sup> Creation is a dialogue. 

<sup>A.37</sup> Creation is an unending act of giving and receiving as
one. So too is dialogue. A.38“Listen and you will hear.” But to what are
you listening? Entering the dialogue is akin to residing in the present
moment and to hearing all that is being spoken in all the ways it is
being spoken. Now is the time to truly begin to “hear” my voice in every
aspect of creation and to respond with your own voice in all of your own
acts of creation. It is time to realize that you are a creator. 

<sup>A.39</sup> This is a time of great intimacy. This is a time that is
between you and I more so than has been the coursework up to this point.
It is a time of realizing that “I” am speaking to “you” directly in
every moment of every day, in all that you encounter, in all that you
feel. It is a time of true revelation in which you are revealed to your
Self. 

<sup>A.40</sup> This is what dialogue, particularly the dialogue that is
an exchange between “two or more gathered together” reveals. It reveals
Who You Are.

<sup>A.41</sup> This relationship between Self and Other, Self and Life,
Self and God, Humanity and Divinity, is the dialogue of which we speak.
It may seem to suggest duality but it suggests relationship. The idea of
unity and relationship must fully enter you now. 

<sup>A.42</sup> You are not a “student” of The Dialogues but a full
participant in The Dialogues. You have entered the final stages of
revelation of Who You Are. When Who You Are is fully revealed you will
realize that it is time to leave the classroom and live as Who You Are
in the world. You will realize that your participation in the world as
Who You Are is part of an on-going dialogue, and that it is an on-going
aspect of creation by which the new will be created. 

<sup>A.43</sup> What now will be your relationship to this work that has
returned you to Who You Are? Your relationship to this work continues as
you live and express Who You Are being in the world. For some of you
this may mean continued involvement with this coursework and a direct
sharing of it with others. For many more of you it will not.

<sup>A.44</sup> For each, being Who You Are will be an expression of
unity and oneness that only you are able to express. As each expresses
who they are being in unity and relationship, creation of the new will
proceed and wholeness and healing renew the world in which you live. 

<sup>A.45</sup> This Course becomes a beloved alma mater, honored and
returned to as a giver of new life. It offers no walls to confine you.
It becomes not dogma to restrict you. It is new life come to extend the
way of creation, the way of love, the way of living, the new way. It
will be with you in every dialogue and will not leave you comfortless.
It has no end point in its benefits and associations. 

<sup>A.46</sup> What continues of this Course is its dialogue. It is
on-going.  

<sup>A.47</sup> Gather still with those with whom you learned and grew
and became new, but gather in ever-wider configurations. This dialogue
is going on all around you. I am with you and will never leave you
comfortless. Call on me, for I am here. Talk to me, and I will hear you.
Listen, and I will respond. I am in each voice that responds to you and
your voice is mine as you respond to others.

<sup>A.48</sup> Go forth not as completed works of art but as permeable
energy, ever changing, ever creating, ever new. Go forth with openness
for revelation to happen through you and through all you encounter. Go
forth joyously on this adventure of discovery. Be ever new, ever one,
ever the beloved.

<sup>A.49</sup> Bring your voice to this continuing dialogue. This is
all that is asked of you. This is the gift you have been given and the
gift you bring the world: your own voice, the voice of Who You Are. This
is not a voice of separation or of the separated self but a voice of
union and of the One Self. It is how union is expressed and made
recognizable in form. It is what will usher in the new and change the
world. It cannot be accomplished without you—without your ability to
stand in unity and relationship as The Accomplished. 

<sup>A.50</sup> Beloved brothers and sisters, You are The Accomplished.

